Today, March 10th. Okay. All day. Good evening, everyone.
I now called this meeting of the south Portland city
council.
To order on Tuesday.
March 10, 20, 26.
If you wish to join me in pledging allegiance to
the Republic, that is the United States. Please do so.
I alleg United States of America into the Republic for what it stands.
One nation under God, invisible with Liberty and justice for.
All
Mr city manager. Can we have a roll call? Thank
you. Oh, yes. Counselor Scott. Yes, .
Counselor Walker here.
Counselor Coleman here, counselor Tipton.
Here mayor. Tippins all right, counselor pride here.
Councilor west here. Councilor Matthews. Yes, sir.
Okay, well done. Thank you everyone for being here and
thank you to everybody else. Who's with us this evening.
I don't think we have anything to do other than
to get rolling into our workshop discussion. Correct. Yay. All
right. Well, the first people up are our friends from
Metro. We're going to hear about bus routes. We're gonna
hear about pat potential future service expansion.
And later we have a little council work to do.
Great. Thank you.
It's good to be back.
Once again, Glenn Fenton, executive director for Metro.
Tonight with me is Mike tremble, our director of transit
development.
And yes, we have a, a few things to update
you on and kind of give you some.
Feedback on how things have been going as a reminder.
South Portland voted to join Metro as a member, community
and merge transit services.
Services in December of 2024.
And so we're a little over a year into that
merger.
So tonight we'll provide an update on the merger. We'll
also provide some information on how service has been performing
and some other initiatives that Metro's working on. And then
we'll walk through some service planning work that's been done
and possible at outcomes of that work.
First I'm the merger itself.
Just want to report back that the eight employees that
came over to Metro from south Portland are still with
Metro.
Happily employed and everything is going well with them. Service
com the south Portland service continues to operate reliably. No
major changes have been made to that service as was
promised as part of that merger.
South Portland board members.
Have become very active on Metro's board of directors with
them taking leadership roles.
Most recently Linda comb was, was.
Elected to Metro as vice president. So we're very grateful
for the board members that you have provided to us.
And the federal grants that were south Portlands are slowly
transitioning over to Metro.
Not, that's not totally done yet, but we're working through
that with our friends at the FTA.
And we're also working on a triennial review on behalf
of both agencies.
This year is our year for our training review. So.
Things going very smoothly with the merger itself.
Other updates from the organization. We continue to work on
designing a bus, rapid transit system or corridor.
Between Gorum Westbrook and Portland, that is in a preliminary
design phase where they're working on the actual station locations
and that service.
We'll be moving that forward later this year with a,
a recommendation for preliminary design, some more to come on
that.
We're working on plans for a new operations and maintenance
facility as we are outgrowing or have outgrown our current
facility. So preliminary planning beginning on that new facility.
Not much to report there again in the preliminary stages,
but we are working on it. We'll be receiving new
buses this summer five new buses coming into service to
retire some older services.
Services and also to help support service expansion that we'll
talk about a little bit later.
We're also undertaking a fair policy analysis that's currently underway.
I'll give you a little more information on that in
just a second.
We're also advocating.
At the state and federal level for additional funding support
for public transit.
We're having we've invited all of it's hard to believe
because there's a lot of them. We've invited all of
the current gubernatorial candidates for an informational session at Metro.
So far, we've had seven candidates visit the site and
we've been able to brief them on the importance of
our service.
And also the need for additional state support to, to
assist with that service.
And then we're planning and working towards a launch of
a new service.
That will serve Scarborough and we'll pass through south Portland
on its way to Portland.
For later this year. And again, I'll provide some more
detail on that in a second.
First, I just wanna talk about the fair, fair policy
analysis a little bit, because I imagine as this information
gets out, there's a possibility that questions could come to
you all about it. This is it's been San six
years now since the last fair.
Increase in our region.
And we have a regional fair policy that we share
with Bedford Sako old orchard beach transit.
So they're a partner in this.
This analysis. So the goals of the analysis are of
course, to increase revenue. We also want to make sure
that our fair policies are in set are designed to
incentivize ridership. So folks that ride more pay less, and
we want to make sure that we're taking steps to
protect those frequent riders and the folks that.
Access reduced fare. And so one other.
Element to that, that I, I forgot to mention is
that we'll also be launching open fair payments, which we're
really excited about.
That's tap to pay. So those touchless credit cards that
everyone has were Google pay or apple pay, we will
be able to accept that on the bus later this
year. So we think that's gonna be a real game
changer for getting people to try the bus. So often
a barrier. The first thing that people say when they're
asked why they don't use public transit is they, they
don't know how to pay.
So, this is an exciting thing that we're really.
Hopeful will, will increase ridership and, and give, provide access
to a lot more folks.
So next steps on the fair policy analysis, we'll be
doing public involvement hearings, both in person and virtually in
April.
With a plan to be.
Made in coordination with our partners at BSU transit in
may for approval would be by our full board in
June.
With implementation coming thereafter, depending on what the recommendations are.
We'll have a better idea on when.
Any changes might be made, but we expect that to
be later this summer.
Ridership update.
So ridership.
Down a little bit from 2024, about 8% down system
wide south Portland's ridership was about the same as it
was previously, or I should say followed that same trend
about 201,000 rides on south Portland routes in 2025.
So far 26.
Has been, we had it easy. So a bit of
down ridership in January.
But some improvements here recently.
So wanted to provide a little bit of detail on
where folks are riding in south Portland, what kind of
usage you're seeing. So this chart shows and we just
kind of.
Grabbed some neighborhoods. We didn't go by specific stops. Cause
there's so many bus stops in the system. So tried
to group these by areas, the bars show you the
ridership by neighborhood. And then the actual line you see,
there is the amount of service that's provided to that
neighborhood in trips per week. So.
You can see that in.
The night filled mill Creek area in the mall area.
We're seeing the highest amounts of ridership.
Knight, of course here, you're seeing a lot, a lot
of your most service is provided to this area.
The mall area, you're actually exceeding the amount of ridership
per service.
And then the brick hill area is, is actually also
outperforming the amount of service provided to that area. And
as Mike gets into the service planning,
in the second half of this presentation, we'll talk a
little bit more about how we hope to take advantage
of these trends and improve ridership.
And then some of these areas we're seeing are underperforming,
right?
So the ocean ocean solar area, definitely lower than the
amount of service that you're seeing in there. Not necessarily
surprising based on the density in that area, but we
do see that in cash corner underperforming a bit unschedule
adherence. We're happy to report that schedule. Adherences improved.
Improved there's only, I think about 10 months of data
on this chart. That's because we had to install the
new technology.
That tracks our on time performance on the south Portland
buses.
Buses. And so I took a little bit of time.
So this is kind of a, a short look at,
on temp performance, but I'm happy that the trends are
moving in the right direction. We have made some schedule
adjustments. Most of them minor.
But aimed at improving schedule adherence because that's really.
It, it drives again, drives ridership. If people can't count
on the bus being on time, again, they're less likely
to ride.
But I think we can, we can and need to
make more improvements in this area.
As our goal is to be 90%.
System-wide 90% or better, I should say. System-wide for on-time
performance.
So I, I mentioned earlier the, the service in Scarborough
and we'll, we'll talk about it in, in how it
relates to the planning efforts here in south Portland.
But I want to provide a little bit of background
on that project.
Initial planning for it started.
Early last year and I would say.
At least in part or maybe in large part.
That the beginning of that conversation was based on the
merger of Metro in south Portland.
Metro became more of a neighbor.
To Scarborough. And so there was interest there in exploring.
What possible service Metro could offer.
So based on discussions with staff, we discussed their goals
and their needs over there for public transit. I mean,
for those of you who don't know, there's very limited.
Existing public transit options in Scarborough. There's the Bedford pus,
which runs about every two and a half hours. So
very infrequent.
And then of course there's the, the.
24 service that just barely touches the, the Walmart area
of Scarborough.
So after those discussions and understanding what their goals were,
we reached, we.
Reached out to PAX and applied for discretionary funding.
We've received about 1.3 million from PACS indiscretionary funding for additional
service in Scarborough.
We also worked with the main turnpike authority.
To gain funding from them about 3.5 million in support from
the main turnpike authority over the next three years.
So those funds primarily are, are what's helping launch the
pilot of this service.
And so after that we begin a public outreach campaign
to really get into the nuts and bolts of what
that route might look like in those services that they
need to get a better understanding of the needs. Part
of that processing included public outreach in south Portland.
Because the communities are so close to one another, we
can't look at.
Transit planning in a vacuum. So we want to understand
where people are traveling and how those.
Those travel patterns are crossing that, that border, especially. So
that was a large part of, of the planning process
and, and helped not only inform this route, but some
of the work again, that, that Michael be explaining here
in a minute about our plans for possible service improvements
here in south Portland.
After that we took that feedback.
We are currently in the process of doing the actual
service plan, which will include the routing.
The bus stop sighting, the scheduling.
And then we, we plan to launch that this summer.
Ideally it's early as July, but possibly as late as
September.
And this is a, just a concept of what that
route.
Will look like, I think it's probably very close to
this. You can see that it'll serve main street, route
one corridor.
In south Portland and, and in Scarborough, and then it'll
serve the downs as well as the park and ride
at exit 42.
It'll come across the veterans bridge and serve the VA
outpatient clinic. Currently there's no service to the VA. That
was another goal of this project was to get service
to the VA.
And so we're really happy to be able to provide
that as part of this. And then it'll connect the
route to downtown Portland.
So looking forward regarding this route. So the route's fully
funded for the first two years. There's a possibility that
it may be funded. There may be enough funding to
go beyond the first two years. We'll have a better
idea. Once we finally the service plan.
At near the end of that pilot phase, we will
be reporting back to the council.
To not just south Portland's council, but to the other
communities as well.
On the performance of the route, how, how many people
are riding?
How, how many trips are we we providing what is
the on time performance, and then a cost estimate for
what the local assessment might be to continue that service.
As a reminder.
Metro's formula for, for cost allocation is based on the
amount of service in each community.
So for this round in particular, it's a relatively small
amount of south Portland.
That we looked at. I think it's 20.
About yeah. About 28% of the route is in south
Portland. The remainder of any local assessment would be for
the communities in which it runs largely in Scarborough and
in part in Portland.
So again, we'd be reaching out to all of the
communities to make sure that there's support for continuation of
the service. Again, all based on our own recommendation. If
the service is underperforming, we may come back with a
recommendation to, to discontinue the service that's. After the two
year pilot is com complete.
If it is approved, we would determine what the cost
we would roll that into our regular.
Cost allocation every year. And it would become part of
the assessments in 2028.
Okay, I'll pass it off to Mike for the planning.
Good evening, everybody.
I'm Mike trem. I'm the director of transit development at
Metro. And I'm here to talk about the goals of
the process going forward. So.
I'm not gonna get into what the, the current service
does and, and, and where the south Portland.
Buses serve today, but I wanted to provide kind of
the, the, the vision forward.
We wanna continue to provide a citywide bus service that
brings south Portland residents across town.
But also to regional destinations.
And ideally in a way that is more frequent and
faster for those, for those passengers.
Passengers. And we're under the, the assumption that the local
investment will be the same as it has been in
previous years. We're not assuming a funding increase, at least
not for the first few options of going to present.
And then I'll, if there is.
Potential for a future investment. Then we want to have
a plan that is scalable, that we can.
Simply add additional buses to the same route and achieve
better frequency or expand hours or operation or, or other
improvements.
So again, we want to overall improve the fruit frequency
in south Portland. A lot of the south Portland roots
run every two hours or so the, the cross town
routes. And so those are, those are routes that we'd
like to see improved frequency as well as improved speed.
A lot of the feedback that we've received is that
people would like to take the bus, but it takes
so much longer to ride the bus than it does
to, to, to, to drive or take a ride chair.
I was of operation. We've heard as a, as a
big weakness of today's service.
There's one route that only runs on weekends. A lot
of routes end around nine o'clock at night. If not
earlier.
And so we'd literally like to kind of make those
out as a operation, more consistent with the rest of
our services, which is seven days a week. And, you
know, for most days, at least running from about six
to 6:00 AM to 10:00 PM.
Sundays is usually a little bit less service, but you
know, for the, for Monday through Saturday, that's the level
of service for when to achieve.
Maintain maintain coverage, wherever practical, but also take a hard
look at locations where ridership isn't meeting.
The levels that we would expect, because if you can
reduce coverage in areas that don't need, don't need the
service. You can improve the speed elsewhere.
And then if possible, provide connections to new places and
increase service where we can.
So again, I'll show the Scarborough route in a bit
more detail that Glenn had mentioned. The great thing about
this route is that it's gonna be connecting the.
Route one main street corridor. So sunset park.
Thornton Heights cash corner all the way through LA and
into Portland. And so this is an area that's relatively
low, has relatively low level of service today.
And those neighborhoods will now see a direct connection into
downtown Portland rather than having to take a longer route.
Through mill Creek and over the bridge over the Casco
bay bridge, there they'll be directly have a direct connection
into downtown Portland.
As well as the point south Scarborough downs, Costco.
Market basket, the medical campus in Scarborough. So a lot
of great service right on this line. And our goal
is to help facilitate connections to this route.
So that, you know, even if you don't live along
this corridor, you might be able to transfer to this
connect corridor pretty quickly.
This corridor figures to have about 45 minute service to
start.
If things go really well, as we hope it will.
We, we could, again, hope to expand that in the
future.
But that's a pretty good level of service compared to
some of the other services in Portland.
In south Portland, I should say. And so hopefully we'll
see quite a bit of ridership along the entire route.
But especially in south Portland.
And as a reminder, the more people that board in
south Portland, the less that assessment goes down. So we
really want to encourage south Portland residents and visitors to,
to take transit.
As Glenn mentioned, we did some public outreach in south
Portland and Scarborough. This past fall. We had an imper
meeting here at the public library.
We also had a survey where we had over 300
responses, about half of those came from people interested in
south riding in south Portland. So a really good response
there.
We also had a virtual meeting.
What we heard from south Portland riders is that.
The top priority is frequent service, longer hours of service.
Faster travel times on board.
A a sliver of people said more direct service, but
I think generally the, the theme was they wanna be
able to get to where they're going more quickly with
less wait time.
Where do people wish they could ride? I kind of
color coded this slide so that.
The places that we already serve are in green. The
places that we don't serve currently are in orange and
the places that that new Scarborough route will serve are
in blue. So people mention, they want to go to
the main mall.
They want to go to the schools? Well, we already
serve those areas. So that must mean that maybe we
should improve service to those areas because what, what we're
offering now, isn't working for those people.
We heard folks wanna get to Westbrook street.
Out to the beaches in Wayne Wright field, we don't serve
those areas now, or at least not very well. Westbrook
street is we serve the Brook hill area, but not
quite, you know, not that area near the closer to
the jet port.
And we heard a lot of folks, people, you know,
saying they, they want to get to not just jobs,
not just, you know, medical appointments, but they wanna go
places that kind of make their life full places that
are fun, right. Sports, fields, and beaches. So that's totally
understandable. And then other locations that we have to be
adding as part of the Scarborough service.
Costco and sunset park.
So we can already check those boxes off. As soon
as we launch that service.
Why don't people ride it, doesn't frequent enough. It's a
lot too long of a walking distance to their bus
stop.
It takes too long. The hours don't work for them.
Some other illustrative feedback that we received. And I won't
read all of these, but typically things like, you know,
they like benches and shelters at their stops. They, they,
this takes too long to walk to their, their bus
stop, you know, more direct route. So.
We collect a lot of information and we tried to
summarize it as best as possible, but these illustrative comments
are often, they often tell a story that we can't
get from a survey. So.
So getting into the concepts. So again, I'm, I'm not
gonna provide a whole lot of background of where the
current service goes.
But one thing we heard a lot from a lot
of folks in, in the public feedback to date is
that the trip to get to and from Southern Maine
community college just takes too long. For those who are
unaware, there's a log kind of a, a longer looping
service. That's serves the Meetinghouse hill area, Willard beach.
Before you can get to Southern main community college.
We have a bus route, the route two that runs
between the Riverton Hannaford.
And in some cases out to Westbrook into downtown Portland,
along forest Ave, and that sort of just ends in
downtown Portland. We think it'd be a great opportunity to
extend that route into south Portland.
Provide a lot of destinations for people who live in
this area of the city to get to lots of
different places in Portland, such as what Woodford's corner.
Morrow's corner and Riverton aside from downtown Portland.
That also provides the opportunity to make both of those
routes better in terms of the amount of frequency and,
and hours that those services get, particularly on the weekend.
And so that, that I think that'll be a really
positive change. The, the travel time to south to SMCC
will be significantly improved from this. And we'll see more
frequent service as well.
So in addition to better service to the east part
of Eastern part of the city, we also want to
provide a fast connection between the east and west parts
of the city currently.
The route 24, a and route 24 B provide connections
between downtown Portland, via mill Creek to the main mall,
but both routes.
They serve a lot of different places along the way.
And as a result, those roots are really slow. It
takes about two hours to make for those roots to
make a full round trip. And so you can imagine
if you're on one of those buses, it's gonna take
you a long time to complete your trip.
So if we can get people on onto this route,
the full round trip might take closer to an hour,
which means one way trip, closer to what a half
hour.
And so that kind of direct east-west trip will hopefully
not only make those, those travel times.
Faster, but those, those trips will come more often because
the buses isn't taking so much time traveling through neighborhoods
or circulating around the mall.
And then finally to provide the coverage that we currently
provide in south Portland. We have a route that is
more or less the, the catchall, the, the neighborhood connector
that we're calling it. So this route will consistently, you
know, it, it's rather it's it's it's.
It's it's more meandering and less direct than we typically
would like, but this, this route would consistently.
Serve most of the city, including Highland Ave, the high
school, the community center.
Red red bank in brick hill.
The main mall in, in the target area. I, I
mentioned brick hill and the high school. Those areas are
really underserved today. As Glenn mentioned.
There's not a whole lot of.
Use of transit near the high school and the community
center, which I think is a really big opportunity.
There's a lot of potential need for transit in those
areas.
Areas and the brick hill area of those folks, you
know, I, I imagine.
A really dependent on transit. The, the transit, the options
that are available today are relatively limited. So if we
can improve those options, I think the ridership in those
areas can be significantly increased.
So those are the, the three routes as we see
them today, those those can more or less be done
within our current budget. We can reallocate the, the, the
buses that are out there today.
And, and more and transform them.
Into this service profile, we had to get into the
details to make sure that that's that's specifically true, but
we also have a couple of ideas for what might,
what we might be able to do.
If additional funding was available, I know that there's transit,
there's tax increment finance districts in the city that we
might be able to take advantage of.
So one of the major ideas we had was this
small area.
Circulator. So one of the weaknesses of our current roots
is that they spend a lot of time.
Around the mall, the range to Walmart, they're running to
target, they're running up and down.
Westbrook street. And, and so.
About 45 minutes of that two hour round trip I
mentioned is just the bus.
Making all these stops around the mall. And so if
we can.
Make the service more dedicated and provide a specific route
that services area.
We might be able to serve the area better and
as well as allow those other routes to, to spend
more time.
Getting back and forth across the city. So this route,
if we can fund it.
Could provide service to the jet port, which south Portland
doesn't currently have, as well as the DHHS office.
That's right near the jet port can provide more consistent
service to Redbank and brick hill.
As well as the shopping areas, the mall target and
Walmart.
Ballpark. So again, this might be aspirational, but we wanted
to provide that, that, that idea as well.
So an overview of the service. And I, I realized
the screen's pretty small, but I wanted to provide this.
Just as a overview.
We also have one additional kind of.
Key in our pocket that we might be able to,
to use. So in the green area on the left
is a, is a proposed micro transits zone in Scarborough.
So in addition to the fixed root service that Glen
was talking about,
they've also funded a micro transits zone, which is an
on-demand service.
Similar to an Uber or Lyft service, but it's operated
by Metro Metro's drivers and vehicles.
Vehicles. And the idea is to make that first and
last mile connection. If, if it's hard for you to
walk to the bus stop.
This service was for you. If it's, if the sidewalk
connections aren't there.
If you're just not able to make those quarter mile
walks of the bus stop, or if the bus doesn't
go where you need it to go, this might be
the way to do it. And so.
As part of this micro transits zone, there might be
an opportunity to expand it.
Into south Portland to cover areas that.
Even this proposal might not cover as well as, as
it should. So.
Again, this is very schematic. It'll do a lot more
work on this. The great thing about microt transits is
very nimble. It's very dynamic. You can make changes to
it pretty easily. And so.
Again, it's not part of our base proposal here, but
it's something that we have in our pocket for potential
future.
Expansion.
So I think that's all we have. We're happy to
answer any questions and.
I'm clapping. Thank you.
All right.
Did you have something more to say? Yeah. So the
sec, second part of the discussion is, is about the
transit advisory committee. And.
It's not as easy to share on my screen, but,
but as part of this discussion,
when we merged Metro, the council at the time had
indicated that they wanted to keep the transit advisory committee
going. It primarily served to help.
Inform our bus service. I think in discussions amongst the
committee, there is support for now dissolving that service, given
the representation.
And feedback we have
on the Metro board. And so that's something that council's
being asked to.
Also provide guidance tonight on, and in addition to any
sort of feedback you want to provide to Metro about
their proposed route restructuring concepts.
Concepts guidance between balancing neighborhood coverage and faster, more efficient
roots.
Interest in future service and enhancements that could require additional
funding.
And also your, your views on transit advisors. Really what
we're looking for.
Well, thank you very much, Scott. I think what I'm
recommending for our process is since we just heard a
pretty complex presentation, we open it up for counselor questions.
Questions then after that we can hear public comment.
On this topic, but we don't have an open public
comment during our workshop meeting. So the comments tonight will
be on the topics on the agenda only.
And then you would like some.
Guidance from our council. And then.
After that I think then we talk about the transit
committee. Does that make sense to folks?
All right. So who has questions for our presenters? Counselor
Walker? Hi, thank you for that presentation. It was really
great. And I have three questions. So my first question,
I think I have the answer to it based on
the changes that you're making, but in the slide about
ridership, the re bank and brick hill areas, would you
expect that.
Ridership would increase with roots that serve on the weekends.
Yes, absolutely. And it's been proven improved frequency in span
of service will undoubtedly increase ridership. And especially as you
can see, that area was overperforming all already, which means
that.
Folks are using the, the limited amount of service there.
So more trips will mean more rides there.
And then this is more of an anecdotal question. Is
there Metro service to the jet port through Portland? I
know there isn't through south Portland, but is there through
Portland there? Yes, there is through, through Portland. Okay. Thank
you. That's.
Other questions, counselor west, you mentioned a new operations and
maintenance facility.
Where, where would that be located?
We haven't cited it yet. Metro has a lease arrangement
with a neighboring property. So there's the possibility of expanding
into the footprint of that neighboring property.
But we're evaluating all options just to make sure that,
that whatever we.
Whatever the next step is, is the most cost effective
one. So it, it hasn't been finalized. I suspect that
we'll have.
A site, I shouldn't say a site, but a plan.
Here in the next 60 days, we should be able
to determine if it's a stay plan or if it's
a.
Look an assess an additional site. Thank you.
Counselor Matthews. Are we still providing students free rides? Yes.
Yes. And I didn't mention it as part of the
presentation, but we did recently meet with.
South Portland, high school principal, and, and talk about.
Trying to incentivize more rides through the high school. And,
and that's one of the elements we think that we
can roll into this service plan is sort of Mike
touched on it.
Improve the frequency and the way that the trips line
up with bell times to be an opportunity to, to
support the high school better.
Thank you.
Other question yes. Question. I'm sorry. Actually, a question for
Scott with that route 28 with the kind of hopeful.
Group is that something that we could help fund through
the.
Texas instrument tick that we're looking at restructuring. Right? That's
because if, if that goes into that,
transit TIF district that we were talking about. We, we
can't fund our current Metro assessment, but there's the possibility
to fund.
Future service expansion from that. Okay. Thank you.
Counselor, Scott.
The ridership data, I assume, is writers getting on at
a certain bus stop.
I assume you do not have data as to where
they go, where they get off.
Inference in terms of a full ride.
On an individual basis? No, but on a broad scale,
yes, we have ons and offs, so, okay. We can
determine what stops have the most. This data was all
boarding data, all boarding history, better detail on boardings, but
we do have a lightings as well. And does the
new.
Would the new
app payment.
Allow additional data acquisition. I mean, respecting private, but it's
really just a better mechanism for payment. We already have
a lot of data on.
On ridership, both like, as I said on and offs,
but not individual.
Account, like, we don't know where people are traveling, but
we know.
In broad strokes, you know, where people are getting on
and on. Yeah. Thank you.
Any other questions, counselors.
I just have
two, I think route 22, route 23. Yay. I wanna
cheer so much for those.
And the new Scarborough route cheering for that one also.
Those are coming soon. When is soon and how will
you work with the city to let people know those
exist now? Yeah. Thank, thank you for that, because I
think I.
May have omitted that really, you know, it's probably the
most important thing that we get from this.
This workshop is, you know, our service, the service changes
that we talked about as soon as would be implemented
would be next year. We would need to have a
better understanding of whether. And so our, our budget process
is a calendar year. So.
We would want to come back to the council.
Ideally, maybe in August.
Or early September to get a, a blessing if there
was to be service changes. Cause that is still our
agreement.
From the merger. So we need to know if we
should be putting together an aspirational.
Ask or if we should put together something that's more
cost neutral, as Mike said, we can do.
Both we can do a cost neutral proposal. The frequency
will not be as good of course, with a cross,
with a cost neutral proposal.
But we can still make those improvements in directness and,
and some of the other ones. And then of course
we'll need to have a better understanding if the TIFF.
Service in, in the main mall area can be funded.
If we should come with that proposal as well. So
the soonest, those would roll out would be next year.
The Scarborough service would be this summer.
Okay, thank you very much.
And as I look further at the, what guidance we're
being asked to give, I think that what you've just
said is what I actually should have.
Known about already, but I was getting so excited seeing
those new roots. And I just had one more question.
What can we do to increase benches and shelters at
the stops?
Stops. So, you know, I, I think the best thing
you can do is make bus stop sites. Part of
your design review process for developments.
So we have kind of a mixed, we have mixed
success with that. We we've had pretty good luck lately
in Portland with, with getting them to include that as
a stipulation for some, some developments. So if that can
be done, that's helped in the, then on new municipal
projects, if those come along and we've already been, you
know, working.
Closely with staff on this. I know, you know, we
were able to complete the, the Western Ave, one in
coordination with.
With south Portland staff. So I think as municipal projects
come along, we'd like to know about that because if
there's sidewalk work being done, sometimes there's an opportunity for
us to.
Leverage that and say, okay, well you already have the
contractor. We have the, the shelter. Let's see if, you
know, if they can just put a pad in, we
can supply the shelter. So we try and.
You know, take advantage of that when we can.
Okay.
Thank you very much. And this isn't a question, but
it is a comment which is, you know, what was
it about a year ago, a year and a half
ago. So the time runs together, we all had to
kind of.
Collaborate and trust.
And look at some feelings about potential loss of the
south Portland bus system. And.
It has come together. Our drivers are still with you.
It's good to hear all of this reporting. So I
just wanna mark this moment. Thank you for that. We're
we're very happy with the way it's come together as
well.
Thank you. I think we can open for public comment
on the topic of our bus transit system.
Anyone
come on. Don't make me use this gavel.
Gavel. Glen, do you mind Rosemary? Pleasantdale I.
Promised Metro. I would give my testimonial. So.
I do love Metro. I think it's a huge.
Additive in our city and really pleased that we have
it and pleased that.
We went ahead with the merger. I.
Will say that
so I wanted to go back to the resolution that
we had to have high school riders, high school students
ride for free and.
Counselor Matthews stole my thunder, but the bike PED committee
did pass that initiative to the council who supported it.
And there was some confusion in the transition, but we
had a meeting at the high school with the, with
Sarah Glenn, the principal, and with Mike tremble, who's a very
fast talker.
By the way, sorry. and Glenn Fenton. And we
were joined by board member, Steve Riley, and the issue.
They were fully open to understanding where the confusion came
and how we were going to resolve it. So our
students are now one again, all writing.
With just the use of their, of their high school
pass.
And I really appreciated hearing tonight that there was going
to be increase.
Near the community center and on Evans street, because that's
one of the challenges we have with students who leave
late and have to get the bus. And right now,
most often that bus is coming at a very slow
pace. So they, they make their way down to a
mottos, which is still really good. And so that they
can get a bus ride home.
And I wanna say that we had a brief discussion
that day.
About potentially looking at now, I'm putting on my school
board hat.
We talked about having a high school.
The high school students potentially ride Metro.
For their, for their bus ride. And of course there
would be a cost implication to that, but.
That, that will be a conversation that will happen between
Metro and Mike Nally, our facilities director.
But I'm excited to hear about that and to look
at that and to think about.
Ways that I said we can make riding a bus,
not geeky, you know, that it's kind of like a
cool thing to do. So one of the ways to
do that is to start with.
With people in their teens where they don't have to
feel like they have to have a car to go
everywhere, but that they can actually ride a bus. So
thrilled, excited.
And thank you all so much. Thank you both.
Thank you very much.
Other public comments about the transportation.
Right. Well, I think we'll call public comment.
Closed on that. And now the council gets to discuss
some questions we've been asked about.
Do you wanna take the questions in order?
You, you can combine them into one statement. I don't
know if it has to be check, check, check, cuz
some of them.
Overlap, but I think mostly for Glen.
To, to hear, you know, what, especially related this summer.
Do you want to come back with a, a larger.
Cost proposal that enhances services or is it more redistributing?
What we currently have to make roots efficient, but not
as much.
Frequency. All right. Do we have a counselor who'd like
to react to these questions?
Questions. Wow. We have counselor Walker. Thank you. Sure. I'm
in full support of this. I think that it's great.
Wherever we can improve access that gets people out of
their cars or makes it easier for pedestrians to get
across this city from a to B.
Is is great. I love the connections to Scarborough. I
think that's a great idea.
I love the idea of it being more efficient. That's
been the main, I, I work right by them mall
and I've never been able to take the bus to
work because it's just not.
It's not feasible from a time perspective. So I love
the idea of making it faster, which is I think
gonna make it easier for people. And I love that.
You'll be.
Reestablishing service to
the red bank in Brook hill areas on the weekend.
I'd be very interested in seeing future enhancements, both from
a cost neutral perspective, but also.
What potential, especially if we're thinking about TIFs, what potentially
that could look like mm-hmm .
Thank you very much. Would someone like to go next
counselor Matthews?
Matthews. Well, admittedly, I was probably the biggest critic of
the merger.
So, I guess I'm eating pie.
Pie pie is good. Yeah. Well, I had to say
pie. I couldn't say the other thing. so.
Anyway, I'm impressed with how well it's going.
I really appreciate the presentation tonight. And I do support
everything that you have moving forward.
Again, I just I'm, I'm glad to see that. We're,
you're still able to provide supple with good service and.
You know, there's always gonna be critics of.
You know, certain routes and.
Time and not being able to get certain places and
it's completely understandable. Some of these places that you put
up there would be.
Kind of problematic actually, I think.
To actually make that happen. So.
I'll be optimistic, but
I do. I do definitely support the plans.
Plans. Thank you very much.
Do we have another counselor?
Counselor, Scott just wanna add my support to all the
work that.
Went on here. Thank you for the data and the
presentation.
And I will say I am the proud mom of
two boys who actually.
Love taking the bus. And one is a high school
student who takes it almost every day. So appreciate that.
I think one
area of guidance that I.
It's a little bit of a question and hopefully some
guidance is that.
When we talk about things being.
Revenue neutral or
requiring additional city funding.
I anticipate that there are many aspects.
Of bus service and public transportation.
That may require
some additional funding, but
are not necessarily revenue neutral in that they.
Sort of save the city and save taxpayers.
Taxpayers other money, like that's the entire point of public
transportation.
So I think as we think about our city funding
and some of the challenges that we have in front
of us,
figuring out a way to.
Tell the story of a comprehensive.
Public transportation.
Benefits that are beyond just, this is a little bit
of an increase in, I, I know I'm preaching to
the choir, but.
You know, this may be additional city funding at this
point, but here is how it saves.
Saves taxpayer money, business money, all of those things. And
thinking about ways to.
Benefit the city.
That is not necessarily revenue neutral or cost based, but.
Building on the sort of externalities of the benefits of
public transportation would be hugely helpful for this council. And
for me, in terms of promoting enhancements to our public
transportation system, which I am a huge.
Advocate of have used.
Promote. My favorite mug actually is a south Berlin transit
authority mug that we got at a like touch the
bus or something event. I know that doesn't exist
anymore, but it's still in circulation. So anyway, that's my
comment. Go forth and go conquer.
love the mug.
Should have brought it.
Okay. Another counselor like to.
Say anything. what
I'm I'm looking at counselor's pride in west counselor west.
I'll just say I have nothing to add. I agree
with what's the points that have been made by my
fellow counselors.
Counselor pride. That makes it easy for me to just
say ditto. okay. We have very.
Succinct counselors today, counselor Coleman, fully support, nothing to add.
And I really do.
Like council Carter's.
Carter's question about if you can give us points so
that we can make that this really is it's a
cost, but the benefit and the long run.
That would, that would be most helpful to all of
us.
Thank you very much.
Well, since Scott has taken the trouble to draft four
questions, I'll quickly answer them. That was the assignment, right?
Supporting the goal of more frequent and direct? Yes. Yes.
Yes.
Initial reactions to the draft route restructuring comments. It was
very interesting to hear what you've heard and what we
need to do. And.
I think all of those sound like great ideas, and
it's exciting to think that there would be a bus
that goes east to west and back again.
Thank you very much for that one. For all of
them.
Guidance on the balance between neighborhood coverage and faster. I
think I already spoke to that and service enhancements, I
guess you already heard me reveal that I do have
some concerns sometimes that we don't have enough accessible shelters
with benches in them when people are waiting. And so
your answer to me was how we get more.
Was to require that when there's new development, that that
puts, but.
You know, there's plenty of bus stops right now that
there is no new development and they still would benefit
I think, from benches and shelters. So I think that's
a goal to keep in mind.
All right.
Our fifth item was, does the city council wish to
dissolve the transit advisory?
Committee, and I think we need to.
Well, do we need to speak to that individually? Or
do we need to show of hands? Does anyone have
questions about that idea?
Yes, counselor Scott. I don't have a question. I had
a comment, so I'll oh, well a comment is fine
too.
I, I would approve of the dissolving of the transit
advisory committee as I'm generally in favor of making our
city.
Work most efficient. And I think that we have proven
that Metro is working well and does not need that
committee.
I also just wanted to say having the five questions
on a slide is exceptionally helpful. So I appreciate that.
good to hear.
All right, counselor pride. I just want to thank the
committee members for the hard work. Yes. That they've done
over the years.
It certainly wasn't an important committee.
Yes. And so I
I appreciate their willingness to.
Disband. If they weren't willing to disband, I'd give them
a hearing out. Cuz I know that I, I appreciate
public participation.
But since they are willing to disband, then I, I,
I support that.
Thank you very much. Anyone else?
Yes.
I mean, I was, I was going to ask for
a show of hands, if we're going to.
Do that, but if you are you wanting to make
a comment? I I'm fine.
Oh, you don't feel shut down. That would be the
last, I was just gonna say as the.
Counselor serving on the transit authority advisory committee. I, I
also wanted to echo counselor Pride's comments. Yes.
That thank the members for their service.
And also for their flexibility, because it's been a year
of, of fluctuation mm-hmm and they've been very willing to
kind of write no pun intended, write it out with
us. and so I just wanted to say thank
you. And I also agree with the idea of dismantled
it.
Disbanding it and council Coleman and mine was, we still
have the, is it two members?
On the board from south Portland.
The Metro border that's yeah. South Portland is well represented
on the Metro board right now. I think it's three,
right? It's three. I think it's yeah. Four even better.
Thank you. Wow. we're a block.
Okay. Linda counselors.
Do you wish to dissolve the transit advisory committee? All
in favor?
What point of order? Yes. Oh, there's no voting during.
I know it's not, it, it won't be counted as
a real vote. I just wanted to do a sort
of official show of hands strel but isn't an
official show of hands of voter. Okay. It's fine. No,
not real. I think it's the it's well, I think
it's same. May I.
See can counselors just indicate if they're in favor, if
yes. I mean how, I mean, you could do it
by like giving a subtle wink if you want not
be counted as a vote, but I, I thought maybe
we could do it that way. All right. Rose reset.
No, you can also ask the city manager if he
has enough. Cause I think he does. Maybe it.
It's me saying all in favor, that makes it seem
like it definitely a vote. So I think maybe we'll
just kind of.
Alright, thank you, parliamentarian. Alright.
Well, I think we've established the will of counsel on
that one. So let's move on to temporary emergency rental
assistance. Thank you again.
Mr city manager, would you like to kick us off
on this one?
Sure thing. Thank you so much.
It's cold.
It's I'll turn the fan off. It's not, the font
was bigger. Apologies if you, for folks at be bigger
than this. So everyone recalls January. There was a surge
in federal immigration enforcement presence in the, in may.
And there was a resulting economic disruption for some households,
either folks not feeling they could leave their house, go
to work or businesses that closed because workers weren't showing
up or.
Whatever reason. So the mayor had asked for based on
some public feedback.
That we received and checking with some counselors that we
have a potential. We have a workshop on potential rental.
Assistance for households that are impacted. And so the goal
was to.
Prevent housing and stability and evictions that may occur.
Without such assistance. So the key questions ultimately for the
council and I, I will display these at the end,
too.
Is should the city provide financial assistance to residents?
Residents experiencing economic disruption. And if the answer is yes.
How should that assistance be delivered? So we'll talk about
whether it's run through the city.
Or if it's via donation to a nonprofit to administer.
And then of course, what should the total funding amount
be?
And if it's city administered, should the council adopt the
staff proposed?
Program structure. We took a little time working with our
social services director to.
To outline what a program would look like if city
run.
So option one for funding to a nonprofit, the city
would allocate funds.
To a non-profit organization that would administer the rental assistance.
We can attach some conditions to it. For example, only
assisting south Portland households.
Households the non-profit would then be responsible for taking in
the applications.
Determining, whether someone's eligible and then they would distribute funds.
To landlords or applicants, you could require it that it's
given to landlords and not applicants. If that's.
That's a concern, which understandably it could be.
There's a couple potential partners that I've identified here for
you project home, which is run by the quality housing
coalition and the Cumberland county homeless prevention program run through
opportunity Alliance. So those are two examples of, of, of
entities as city could partner with provide that fund to.
The pros and cons there, the pros are that nonprofits
already have an established relationship and trust and impacted communities.
They're they're in some cases already doing this work.
It reduces administrative workload that would fall on city staff.
If we were to administer it.
And nonprofits may provide additional outreach to residents in need
that we frankly.
Might not be able to the cons of course, is
there's less direct oversight by the city. Although we're sending
money.
For this purpose, perhaps with some strings.
Strings, you know, we're not deciding cases on an individual
basis.
There may be potential administrative fees, but I'm not aware
that the two groups that I mentioned would charge those.
And there may be some desire for the city to
still.
Monitor reporting and compliance. If there are kind of conditions
or, or strings attached to those dollars.
The second option would be a city administrative program. It
would be ultimately administered through our social services, general assistant
department.
The process would be very similar applicants, submit documentation of.
Income disruption, which we can talk about in a little
bit.
If we verify that there's housing instability, then we would
provide assistance and pay it directly to as we've proposed
it, landlords.
Landlords some of the requirements. And again, these are things
that we've come up with. And if you do choose
to have this be city administered, if this is something
you want to do, we'd want you to weigh in
on some of these things. But.
Certainly you have to be a resident of south Portland
and occupy a rental unit within the city.
You need to demonstrate that you have responsibility for paying
rent. So you're not someone that's sleeping on the couch
and not responsible for the rent. You're the actual person
that is responsible on the lease.
You demonstrate that you had an income loss or employment
disruption between.
January 15th, which was a little bit before the surge happened,
but rumors were certainly swirling. And then March 1st that covers
a nice long timeframe.
That could be associated with economic disruption related to federal
enforcement activity.
Demonstrate housing instability such as your rent is in arrears.
You've received late notices or in, or at eviction risk.
We would recommend the person first apply for general assistance
or seek other sources of funding we've actually had.
Several folks in choir about possible assistance and we've run
them either through GA.
Or we've referred them to other agencies and they've been
able to find the resources that they've needed.
And so if those have been exhausted, this would almost
be like a program of, of last resort.
We proposed limiting it to two months of assistance, a
maximum of 3000 per household. And, and again, paid directly
to the landlord.
We would accept applications until June 1st or when funds are
exhausted. Whichever comes first.
Any sort of funds that were unused would come back
to the source. So if example, if you pulled this
from your fund balance, it would go back to fund
balance.
And then also importantly, we would not.
Require the disclosure of immigration status.
As part of any application, nor would we voluntarily share
any of this program?
Information or applications or otherwise.
With federal enforcement authorities, unless.
We of course required to by law or some sort
of court order or warrant.
Pros and cons here. There's very strong oversight and accountability
of municipal funds. The assistance is clearly targeted towards.
This situation and housing stabilization.
And there's consistent eligibility standards and verification procedures that we
would have in place.
The cons again, requires administrative capacity from our existing city
staff. There's no new staff that would be accepting and
reviewing.
This and, and cutting the checks to landlords.
Landlords application processing time would be required.
Required. And some residents, frankly, may be hesitant to apply
directly through a municipal program.
Given that we're a public entity.
So moving on from that funding considerations, according to project
home, the average assistance is approximately $2,100 per household. That's
an updated number I got today from Victoria Morales. So if
the council this to move forward and you're looking for
a funding amount recommendation, we would.
Suggest up to $150,000 from undesignated fund balance.
This would reduce our capacity for future C I P
items. So if this money is used for this purpose,
we there's either gonna be a, a C I P
item or items that we don't fund or we'd have
to use property taxes to fund, but that's, it's up
to the council to choose the priorities.
We should obviously restrict it to south Portland households. And
based on the numbers from project home, we'd be able
to assist about 71 households with that amount of money.
So our recommendation, if this is something that you wish
to do, we do recommend providing funding to one or
more of the nonprofits.
Nonprofits, we think project home where they're already doing this
work seems to be best suited.
For this type of funding.
There's the question of, is it just a lump sum
that we give to them or is it kind of
on a reimbursement basis where they provide to us assistance
that they've given to south Portland households and we reimburse
accordingly. If you want to give it into that level
of specific specificity.
You certainly can. And so ultimately hear your questions again.
Are we providing assistance? And if yes.
City nonprofit funding outsource and any additional program requirements, restrictions,
or, or if it's a city run, do you agree
with what we've come up with? So,
Chris. Did you wanna share anything? This it'd be really
your office. We, we administering this.
Just
obviously we're ready to kind of just do what we
need to do. So if this is something that we
decide to go with, then we can, you know, we
could do that.
That said haven't, you know, there was definitely an uptick
of folks reaching out as a result of this situation.
But we weren't by any means inundated by like a
large.
Sum. So I'm gonna keep in mind, I guess.
Okay. Thanks Chris. Ladies and gentlemen, Chris, PKE the head
of GA. Oh, thank you. whoops. Thanks sir. Thanks
you. Part of my chat.
Okay, so you're finished. Chris is finished.
Alright, counselors.
Questions and
I think I, we could ha potentially have a lot
of questions.
Questions anyone wanna roll off?
As our starter. All right, counselor, Scott. Thank you. I
think I have two.
Main questions. One.
I guess Scott, I wanted to clarify.
Your thoughts? I think from.
One of your slides.
The recommendation was to go with a non-profit versus city
staff. And I wanted to clarify that that.
Was correct. And that you feel that this would be.
Not a huge burden, but obviously a.
An additional
request on the city and that your recommendation would be
to go through a non, I mean, yeah, I, I
think there can be enough say in my, in my
discussions with, I mean, I only really had an extensive
conversation with project home staff, but based on the screening
process, they go through the fact that we could restrict
it to sell Portland residents.
Residence and that they do, as I said, some vetting.
I, I think they could handle it. And, and so
if they, if they're already doing it and they can
handle it, I don't know if we need to reinvent
the wheel. As, as Chris said, this isn't gonna break
his department. If it, if it is handled in-house. But
I think there's some benefits to an agent agency that's
already established in a has can connection.
In some of these communities that folks maybe feel.
Better reaching out to them. That set of council wants
to run it through us. We, we can do what
we've set up the parameters to do it, but, but
we would recommend going with a nonprofit.
Non-profit okay. And sorry, my question list is sort of
growing.
There is, I mean, obviously still the opportunity of going
through general assistance in south Portland and obviously of course,
seeking out other services. And I know GA is very.
Good at connecting folks with resources.
Resources, the, the problem with GA sometimes Chris, correct me
if I get it wrong. But if someone is employed
and they missed a brief period, they may not qualify
for GA because they do have that job and that
income. So.
Chris is gonna correct me, Chris pumpkin director is social
services, general assistant .
That was absolutely correct. Yes. You've. If the thing of
GA is that.
We were instructed by the state when determining eligibility for
this specifically, that missing work.
And therefore violating the general assistance's work requirements specifically.
Out of fear of encountering immigration enforcement was not to
be considered just cause on its own. There might be
a little issues related to that.
That we could then kind of say, well, this is
just cause, but for the most part. Great. So you
might not be eligible for GA.
If you apply for just GA, which you can that's
state mandate doesn't city have the ability to no. No.
Okay. That's thank you. The other question was, do we
have some data either from project home opportunity Alliance?
As to
sort of the, I'm just trying to assess the need.
And thinking about that in terms of the funding allocation.
If we have a sense of data from.
Number of households that are in this situation.
Financial sort of volume here.
So I'm not planning on my phone. I was looking,
I got an email today from project home folks. So
since January 23rd, and this is regionwide, there have been 807.
Contacts to the project homes, emergency housing fund.
And there have been many more informal or incomplete inquiries.
Out of those contacts, 470 had confirmed addresses and 80
of them were from south Portland.
It looks like it. I didn't have a number, but
according to.
Victoria Morales to assist all south Portland households currently on their
list.
The total cost would be $168,000. I didn't get clarity
on whether that's.
That's including ones they've already assisted or ones that are
still to be assisted, but I guess they're, they're seeing.
Demand. Yeah, no, no, that, that's very helpful. Thank you.
I think that's all for now.
It sounded like, and I also.
Questioned her earlier today that it's 80 times, 2000 about,
and that's where they get to once. And so those
are the 80, not yet served from self. Yes. Got
it.
Scott, can you just clarify, is that 80 families affected
by ice?
So, I don't know if that they all were, they
were, I think she indicated in her message that many
of them indicate that that's what it was, but.
I, I, I don't know if it means all of
them or thanks.
Natalie.
I think I might have an answer. Is that okay?
I do too. Oh yeah. That, when that she said
that the purp that for these purposes of.
Emergency rental assistance. They have the fund that they have
designed.
To help households.
Households, exclusively this money, even though they in the past
have provided a eviction rental.
Assistance, but specifically for the numbers she's giving Scott.
It's families that have lost income because of immigration enforcement
actions or fear of detention.
If that's helpful.
So, all right. Other questions, council west. So immigration enforcement
actions or fear of detention.
Attention. So I just to try to keep this as
fact based as possible, and maybe the chief is the
best person to answer. I just might like to get
straight.
How long did the surge last.
And how many people were apprehended by ice in south
Portland.
Please chief Danaher.
He's always, he's always Mr. Manager, please.
You're a two-part question. So.
My contact gave me a number of 220.
Overall arrests over a four day period.
The statewide, I'm sorry. Statewide. Right? Statewide.
When I asked to be for specific numbers of south
Poland, I was not given an answer. And that was
the last.
Information I have with this contact, if I had to
guess based on the.
Calls for service that we had, I would say less
than five, but again, that's a guess.
In salt, Portland, and, and the duration.
Four day duration. They were only here for four days.
Thank you. More, more questions.
Questions, counselor Scott. I just had one more clarification. I
think Scott, you mentioned that if we were to.
Provide a donation to project home.
There is the ability to provide sort of.
A city allocation.
But not necessarily.
Fund that, that we could sort of reimburse on a
needs basis.
From them, if you wanna send it up that way,
where, you know, they, they kind of send us a
list every week or month saying, Hey, here's the families
that we assisted in south Portland.
And here was the cost.
We, we could, we could do it that way. Or
you could do it where here's 150.
You've got until June 1st or, or if you don't wanna
put any restriction on it, but you've got until a
certain amount of time.
To, to spend this on south Portland families just report
back to us with the, with the data, but you
can do it either way. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. Any other counselors questions? I have one.
I had an expected to ask this question, but you
did mention that the 150,000 were you just using that
as the ballpark?
Could have an impact on future C I P request.
So to put that in context,
Scott. And again, not trying to put you on the
spot, but ballpark, when you bring that budget.
Forward in for FY 27.
Are we gonna see C I P as, you know,
300,000, which I.
Think that's pretty low and 150 would be significant. Yeah.
Right. Or are we gonna see like 2.5 million? I just,
I'm looking for a little context. Good context. So.
So this is the amount. So we fund CIP P
from numerous sources. Some of it comes from grants. Some
of it comes from.
TIFF reserve. Some of it comes from other reserves that
we've built up, you know, like for our firetruck, we
try to save up for that before we buy a
new one. So there's reserves like that. So the amount
that actually comes from undesignated fund balance.
You know, so every year.
Historically has been around one to 1.2 million.
In the past couple years, we've actually had a, on
the city side. We've actually had a pretty decent return
on our fund balance. So this year, for example,
we're gonna spend about 3 million.
From undesignated fund balance on our C I P at
Adams. Now this does not fund all the requests. There's.
There's a lot of things that departments.
Are not getting that, that, you know, they, that if
we had more money, they would, but this, this wouldn't
impact anything in this year's budget. It just would mean.
Next year, there's a pool of money that would carry
over and it would be $150,000 less. So.
So in that context, next year, we might spend 2.85 million.
Okay. That is helpful.
At least to me. I thank you for it.
And now I think we can open public comment on
this topic. Public comment on this topic alone is open.
Thank you.
And please say your name. You can say the street
you live on.
And watch your three minute timer.
Timer. If it works, if it works. all right.
Good evening. My name is Margo Krak and this is
my mom, Emily Hansen. We live on hillside avenue. We are
so pleased. You are discussing rent relief.
At today's workshop.
As you know, many south Portland residents are still struggling
financially from the ice operation in January.
And some have asked us to share their experiences with
you tonight.
One resident wrote.
Wrote while being held by ice at a jail in
Maine.
I was kept in a freezing room with dozens of
other people.
I fell because the shoes provided were too big.
Causing an injury that was ignored by staff.
I lost weight because the food was barely edible.
And guards used abusive language towards us daily.
I felt that because I was an immigrant, I was
treated as if I had no human rights.
Rights. I lost my job. I can't pay rent.
And the landlord sent a letter of quit to my
family.
An organization to help my family, but they couldn't pay
at all.
My credit score is affected.
Please south Portland help us.
Another resident writes.
Rights. I am a parent in south Portland.
And I was terrified to send my children to school.
Following the catch of the day operation. My children's school
was on lockdown. A neighbor told me they saw ice
agents near the elementary dry school driveway.
My kids were too scared to go to class and
I have lost work because, because I could not leave
them alone.
I kept receiving bills and emails from my landlord to
pay rent.
But I was not working and I had no idea
what to do. They sent me a quit letter.
Another woman writes.
Writes, my husband was detained by ice while on his
way to work.
He is our primary earner.
Now not only am I left alone to care for
our children.
But I had to use the money I had saved
for our rent.
To pay for a lawyer to help him.
I don't know how I will keep our apartment for
the rest of the month.
These stories from individuals are heartbreaking.
And we know that evictions have ripple effects throughout our
communities.
They are disrupting to children's education.
Cause instability in the workforce.
And increased municipal costs.
South Portland residents have been working hard.
Trying to connect families with rent support through community.
Organizations general assistance and local.
Fundraising. It has not gone far enough. We need your
help.
Let's continue to work together by funding.
A much needed rent relief program.
Thank you very much to both of you.
Do we have anyone else who'd like to make public
comment on this topic?
It's a hard act to follow.
I'm Chelsea Bian. I live on Margaret street.
And first just thank you for.
Taking up this issue and considering these options this evening.
I
will be quick. I, I guess two things, one, I
think.
Either of these options are, are good ones.
Ones. And I think the most.
Essential thing here is to do.
To create a program that will do what we need
it to do, which is to get money to people
who need it.
As quickly and fairly as possible.
And I do think that speed is a factor here.
Obviously when an eviction is started.
Costs are compounded pretty quickly.
And so creating a system that will get money to
people who need it efficiently is key.
I wrote the letter that was submitted to you with
140 signatures from residence last week.
And that letter laid out a GA or a city
administered.
Option. However, I, I was just speaking for myself, not
the other 139. I do think using project home is
a great option. They are an organization that is already
set up to do this. And I, I like that.
They're able to do a south Portland specific fund.
And
and
I think there is.
I do have one concern with the, the.
Plan laid out in
for a city administered fund, which is the sense of.
Requiring people to offer sort of proof of fear.
A proof of a loss of income or a loss
of time at work.
I, I very much understand the, the desire to kind
of introduce him accountability to the, this program.
I also know of families who.
For example, the mother continued to work and the father.
Had to delay.
His own job search because of the surge. And so
that is a hard.
Thing to prove how you, how that family is affected
and just thinking we wanna, we want the.
Barriers to be low.
While still being responsible.
It seems like project home is set up to do
that.
And also
I appreciate the chief's statistics or, you know, his summary
of the surge.
I do. I, I realize it was a four day.
Official event, however,
as we know, 30 seconds specifically from, you know, the,
the school departments, the fear went on much longer than
that. And in fact, ice operations are ongoing in our
state that there's news all the time of oh, of,
of people being arrested. And so that fear is continuing
and we need to take account for that.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Anyone else like to make a
comment? Thank you.
Good evening.
I'm Reverend Allison Butrick Patton. I'm the senior minister at
first congregational church, United church of Christ at 3 0 1 cottage
road.
And I'm joined this evening.
By the interim director of our community crisis ministry, which
is a project.
Of first congregational church, Kathy Cotter, and one of the
committee members for that same project.
Scott Barry.
We work routinely to respond to.
Emergency needs of our neighbors in south Portland and in
Cape Elizabeth providing.
Rent relief and, and other kinds of assistance as.
People are referred to us.
By GA. And so I want to stand just to
affirm. What's already been lifted up that this is an
important and timely proposal.
And also appreciate the work that GA does in an
ongoing way.
We've very much been grateful for, not just how they've
referred folks to us, but also the feedback we get
about the experience that folks have when they go to
GA.
And also wanna affirm that there are folks currently who
may feel more comfortable.
Going to a nonprofit organization that is already set up
to be working with immigrants and has.
Has those processes built in.
So gratitude for and faith in the work of GA
and also.
Want to support the city's.
City's recommendation that this
go forward in whatever way you discern might be best,
but certainly affirm the, the idea that, that sending this
to a nonprofit that's already doing this work makes a
great deal of sense. Thank you so much for taking
this up. We feel.
The dismay of our neighbors on a weekly basis.
As I know many of you do, and I am
grateful that you're taking time to consider this intervention.
Thank you very much.
Do we have additional public comment on this topic?
Anyone please don't be shy.
Rosemore DeAngelo's pleasant deal. I, I think that.
Going through a nonprofit makes perfect sense. I think that.
Having this be an additional.
Responsibility on our general assistant staff, even though.
They're certainly sound like they're willing to do that.
Being able to vet the con the, the applications and.
Go through all of that, that is already set up
through project home.
I think it makes
sense to just continue to do that.
I've had at least three friends who were, as we
say, kidnapped during this surge.
And so they, and I would agree with the previous
speakers, you know, this has continued to have impact.
I would also say that there have been other.
Organizations people, private citizens who have made donations.
There have been, there's been an effort to assist.
Many residents along the way.
And I also just wanted to say, as a member
of the school board,
I was kept abreast of all ice activities near our
schools.
And the, and I can safely say we did not
have any ice activities in any of our schools. So
I just want.
That to be publicly stated, because I don't want people
to leave here thinking that there were children.
Taken from bus stops or, or anywhere like that did
not happen in south Portland.
I
the last thing I would say is I would support.
I mean, this is a.
This is a time of financial crisis for everybody.
And so I would support making a donation of, for
example, $50,000.
And then getting documentation from project home.
Of the spend down of that to south Portland families,
and then let the council decide if it wants to
make an additional donation beyond that. But I think we
have to make a good faith effort and do that.
And I encourage that and support that. And at the
same time,
as I'm trying to deal with the.
Present school budget. I'm very.
Sensitive to what the
responsibilities and
and
yeah, just what the financial responsibilities are on everyone right
now. And so I think that we have to be
cautious.
With our own spending and that you are spending taxpayers
money. So 30 seconds, I just encourage you to make
a flat donation, get documentation of the expenditure of it,
and then make a decision about whether you want to
add more. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Anyone else. If you have a public comment to make,
please come to the microphone. Thank you.
Hang on for one second.
You good? Yeah. Yeah. Okay.
Alex Redfield. I live on Cooper street. I'm gonna talk
really fast and put this into three minutes.
I really appreciate seeing all of our elected representatives return
to an important topic. And I'm starting with authentic and
sincere gratitude.
We're continue attention and interest in exploring what rental assistance
might mean for our community members.
It's clear. There's a lot of work in thought and
prudence being applied by you all making tough decisions about
buses, which I also care about.
And that's really hardening to see. So thank you for
that. I'm gonna use my time to share a few
completely unscientific extensions of math based on what somebody who
got a C plus in precalculus can do with 30
minutes of playing around with a census bureau in Google
scholar. I'm sure the, these to give you a different
perspective on the scope of what happened in January.
I hope you have better math than this, but I'm
happy to share my sources.
20% of south Portland's population is non-white that's roughly 5,500
people. Certainly not all non-white people felt the brunt of
the fear caused by enhanced enforcement operations. Not all of
them are renters. Not all those people lost income, but
because they're isn't any oversight or accountability, I'm gonna use
that number for discussion today.
More than 95% of non-white people in men are foreign
born or first generation immigrants. People. Part of that demographic
are more likely to start and run businesses. People in
that demographic are more likely to hire new employees in
their communities in a time where across the Northeast populations
are gonna getting older for new to men are disproportionate,
disproportionately younger and of working age, right at a time.
Where our community is wrestling with the impacts of long-term
trends of aging populations, meaning fewer school-aged families, meaning deceased
enrollment is decreased enrollment in schools.
So in January, a super valuable part of our community,
even if we're just looking at the tiniest least, complete
least important assessment of what this contr community contributes, that
community experience, an income disruption, quick D door to put
250 arrest statewide contact 250 arrests out of 53,000 immigrants
in Maine means half of 1%.
Seems low. Let's talk about COVID 1800 deaths in Maine.
That's 378% higher.
The of a rate and we were really afraid. We
were all afraid. We disrupted every part of our society
to protect, even though.
Only 1800 people died.
That's a weird thing to say. I don't feel good
about that. I take it back. Whatever .
Renters who experience an income disruption are three times more
likely to miss a housing payment, three times more likely
to miss utility payment, 14 times more likely to be
evicted one in 10 people who need rental assistance actually
receive it. And across the board, people who are evicted
leave their C communities move to less state and stable
housing. The cost of that displacement is often born by
municipal government.
Governments a long-term study by the urban Institute, quantified the
cost of unpaid property tax bills, utility bills, access drain
on social services and municipal programs in Miami.
Calculated that to be between 13 and 31 million annually. That's
four tenths between four tenths and nine tenths of a
percent of their annual budget.
Extrapolate that to south Portland's budget, we're talking $900,000 a
year in costs.
That social services, school department costs not even talking about
shelters or emergency response.
So counselor Scott's comment.
There's so much more than dollars and dollars out here.
My gum shoe detective work includes an ounce of prevention
is worth a pound of cure. Mitigating. The long-term cost
of evictions is an immediate medium term and long-term investment.
That makes sense. I hope you make it. Thank you.
Thank you for your comment.
And your, and your math. I think.
Anyone else want to make a comment?
Did Chris, did you have some information to add? I
just wanted to thank crisis ministries.
For, since they're joining us here tonight, when I say
that when some folks might not be eligible for GA
and we have to refer out, they're always our first
kind of tool in the toolbox. So I do appreciate
that taking here tonight. I appreciate all their help, not
just for this top, like this is issue, but really
throughout the year. So going and thanks. Good to hear.
Thank you.
He's still the same person. Right. Okay. I don't see
any more comments about this.
So it is closed. Thank you. So I think counselors,
what we.
Are here to determine is, do you.
Think we should make some.
Type of
money, some type of fund available either through the city
or by.
Making a donation. If you do, do you have some
comments on the amount?
And yeah, I think that's it. Your commenting, whether we
should, how we should and how much we should or
should not.
Counselor Matthews I'll go first. Cause I'm probably going to
be in the minority. So.
I don't know if anybody watched the school board meeting
last night.
I was very glad to see that the chairman of
the board set up and said that we need to
be very cautious.
Of every dime that we spend.
My phone was filled with text messages and personal emails
from.
Community members, teachers, ed techs.
Techs. And I know there's a lot of.
Charities out there. I know that home.
Has set a goal for this for $500,000. And I
believe currently I've been told they're at 400 and.
80 something thousand.
And us adding 150,000 would put them all over the.
Close to 600, over 600,000. So.
I understand everybody's thought process on this.
I really do, but
you know, there's a lot of charities that reach out
to me all the time. Can you give, can you
give, well, I can only.
Give what I can afford.
And I'm not sure that people are really, really paying
attention. That cities south Portland is financially in big trouble
right now. They really are.
And as a counselor, we have to look at the
big picture. We can't just look at.
At a small picture. We have to look at the
big picture.
For everybody. And I'm not just saying that this is
just a school department problem because school department is 62%.
Of the entire budget and.
We have been told also as well as a city
council, that the city side is going to be very
tight this year as well.
So, I'm not sure that it makes any financial sense
to the entire city.
To be giving taxpayer money.
To an organization.
That we, we just can't afford right now. We cannot
afford it.
Our taxes have gone through the roof.
We have a Pearl street pump station that we.
Absolutely have to have
or all your sewer, stuff's gonna be backing up into
your houses and stuff.
And we need to pay for that.
And yes, as funny as that sounds, it's not funny.
No, I'm laughing. I just, but the thing is, is
we just absolutely.
Need to be as the school board chair said, cautious.
Of every dime we spend. So I, I do not
support.
Funding anything to
support this when we have a good GA system.
I'm going to point of order myself. I was not
making any editorial comment. No, that's fine. No, I just
on what you said, I just, sometimes you speak colorfully.
No, I do. .
Counselor west, I guess we could just go around the
road. Well, we could, or we'll go back and forth.
Okay. I, I just wanna say, I think EV I
can, of the things we agree on in this room,
we all agree that the ice surge was a terrible
difficult.
Thing and a horrible thing for the.
All of our communities, not just.
Our people of color, but all of us.
And yet we have to, as counselors balance.
A lot of factors. And one other factors is that
the surge lasted.
Four days and the
less than five people were arrested in south Portland. The,
the bulk of the surge was Portland and Lewiston.
And that we've heard now tonight, there were no ice
activities at our schools.
And there's another factor too.
I am personally familiar.
With people of color who had reason to fear.
And yet who did work, who did pay their rent?
Cuz I've told you all that we're a landlord.
And so in some senses,
senses. We have to support those people too. The ones.
Ones that were willing to take a risk and that
were willing to continue to fulfill their obligations because that
also needs to be rewarded.
I praise the first congregational church. Thank you for all.
You've done.
I certainly would urge anyone in the community to make
donations to these organizations.
And I wanna pick up on what.
Counselor Matthews said, because when you go to the project
home emergency housing fund, which says all donations, support households,
unable to cover housing costs due to the loss of
income from ice and four enforcement and fear of detention.
And they've raised 483,000 toward their goal of 500,000.
And where I'm coming from is.
That I would be willing because.
Of it is a, it's an it's very important.
And yet at the same time, I did listen to
the, I did listen to the school board last night.
And I mean, those are our children.
Those are our children and the future of our community.
And we have a.
A situation that is grim with our school budget, not
to mention all our other issues.
Issues. So if we
gave $20,000 to project hope.
That would take them over the top of their $500,000
goal.
It would be a, an indication that our community cares.
It would be an indication that we're making a contribution
that would in all likelihood cover the families that were
directly affected in our community. And, and that's what I
would be willing to support.
Thank you, counselor west.
Anyone want to go next, counselor, Scott. Thank you.
I
obviously thought a lot about this. And I, I think
coming into this meeting, I was actually closer to having
sort of a city administered fund, but hearing, I think
the comments from.
Scott and from the public, I, I am more in
favor of doing something through a nonprofit, and that is
with the caveat.
That it would not be.
A sort of unrestricted blanket.
Amount. I think that amount, if we were to decide
upon an amount.
I would like that to be on sort of a.
As needed basis that we would have an allocation that
would be available to them on an as needed basis
to move forward with supporting south Portland families.
I am more in the a hundred thousand dollars range,
thinking about the.
Sort of data that we got, that there might be.
$168,000 of sort of south Portland need maybe 80 or
so families.
Obviously there's a lot of money that has gone into
that nonprofit to support a lot of those.
Needs already. So I don't know that we need to
sort of fully fund that, but I'm more in the
sort of a hundred thousand dollars range thinking about.
The fact that I think there will still be some
more.
Needs coming forward. And, and if this program is rolled
out, maybe that will encourage more people to come forward.
I understand as all of us do the constraints on
our budget and what we're.
Looking at, I see 80 families.
As being 80 students who may not be in that
school system next year.
And that's a much bigger financial burden than.
A hundred thousand dollars. So I think.
Thinking about 80 families that we can support staying in
south Portland and contributing to our economy and the rent.
And supporting, you know, our city supporting the school system.
That seems to me an incredibly small investment.
In keeping those families here.
And
I think supporting a massive.
Disaster of our federal government to be.
I think understating my feelings about that.
So I, I am very in favor of providing some
support. I think it should be in the a hundred
thousand dollars range. I like the idea of a nonprofit
and that it would have some conditions in terms of
not being a blanket.
Sort of check, but that's, that's where I am. And
I, I think we, we, we have to do something.
This is absolutely atrocious.
This is impacting families. I don't care if they were.
Afraid or actually lost income or whatnot. We have to
sort of.
Write a very ma major.
Wrong. And I, I think as much as I appreciate.
The data that was provided from our police chief. I
think that is incredibly understating.
What has actually been happening in our community and.
What has happened over a longer period of time than
just the.
The date stated
stated. So that's where I am. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Do we have someone who would
like to go next?
Counselor Walker. I can go. I'm in full support of
this.
I to the points that were made before about the
amount that project home is hoping to fundraise.
Fundraise and that $500,000.
The director of project home stated that there's 407 households
in the greater Portland area in need of assistance right
now. And with average rents being $2,100 for a two
bedroom.
That puts the current need that project ho home has
at $854,700.
And so that 500,000 doesn't even get too close to
meeting their current known need.
And the fact that there are 80 known households in
south Portland.
80 of our friends and neighbors are community members that
are in dire need.
I think it is vital that we support them. I'm
in support of giving the full 168,000. I think project
home should administer it. I'd be open. I'm fine with
giving a donation, but I'd be open to Carter. Scott's
counselor. Scott's suggestion of.
And kind of as needed.
Fund
but I, I think that this is so important. I
understand that the surge on paper was short, but I
know.
I know that there is still fear in the community.
And I know that people are still afraid to go
to work. They're still afraid to send their kids to
school.
They're still, even for those who missed work for a
short amount of time when you're living on an incredibly
tight budget.
Any lost income sets up a snowball effect. You know,
it costs a lot to be poor.
A lot, because you can't really save for rain day
funds. And so if someone missed a week of work
and then there was a medical need, then that rent
money is gonna get assessed to that medical need. Or
if they're afraid of being unable to feed their children,
because they can't leave their house, they're gonna tap into
their rent man to give to someone to get them
groceries. So.
That they can feed their children. So get off my
soapbox, but I am in full support. I think we
should do 168,000. I think project home should administer it.
And I'd be open to some sort of report out.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, counselor Walker.
We have counselor pride and counselor Coleman, who would like
to go next? I want to hear what Miesha has
to say for us. I'm sorry. Okay. I'm on the
spot.
So I am very much appreciative of the mayor for
bringing this forward. I think I'm among the people who
asked her to do so. So thank you, mayor Tipton.
I am.
I'm in favor of doing something I'm, you know, when
we.
When we said no to the moratorium.
I think I made it pretty clear that.
I was saying no to the moratorium, cuz it's a
sledgehammer because it's affecting people.
Who may
not get sorry that, that it's affecting people who may
not have been affected by ice at all.
This feels more like a scalpel. This feels more like
we sh what we should be doing.
I am.
I appreciate
the nonprofit approach. I think that can be good. I
also appreciate the.
Reimbursement approach.
With some kind of verification, accountability measure thrown in there.
Cause I.
One thing that is a little bit, and, and this
is not a reason I'm not going to support it,
but.
One piece of this, that's a little bit sort of
a nag of the back. Might.
My brain is that, you know, if project home is
gonna help X number of south Portland households with the
money they do have, and then we.
Supply them with more money, then they can use that
same money. They had already allocated to south Portland to
help.
Other communities mm-hmm so in some ways we're subsidizing.
The area, but I think.
The approach to homelessness, housing issues should be original approach,
you know, and if south Portland puts some money towards
that regional approach, maybe other, maybe other communities will, will
follow our lead.
So I, I am in favor of this.
I think that there's another aspect that sort of is,
is sort of falling away here.
We
landlords who did not get paid or not getting that
money back no matter if they evict the person or
not.
They're just not, I mean, they may be able to
make some kind of payment plan and it may be
eventually, but.
By doing this, we're also supporting our landlords, the ones
who continued to house.
Our vulnerable populations.
And so, yeah, it it's somewhat targeted in that way
that you know, that.
I think
you know, we're, we're helping two populations here. We're helping
the population of people who are unhoused, vulnerable.
And
that is important to me.
And so we are also helping the landlords continue to
house those people.
Not lose a month or two rent.
And I think, and I understand the data approach. I,
I get it, the five people removed, but that doesn't
mean that more wouldn't have been arrested. Had they not
been hiding in their apartments? You know, that's on, that's
on immeasurable. Right? We can't, we can't know that for
sure.
But there may have been more. I mean, I remember
reading that story about the kid in Westbrook who got
an offender bender, and because he got an offender bender,
he was approached by ice and taken away. And before
he knew it, he was in Massachusetts and he was
the gray winner for his, for his family. His, his
mom was staying home with the kids and you.
Know, he was there to help out, but you know,
he was also a student.
And so, you know,
that was a loss for them. And there was fear
there.
And if, if more south Portland.
Community members were out there.
You know, driving, getting in fender benders or whatever.
There might have been more loss to our community. And
I'm very thankful that there that it was only five,
but I'm also devastated that five people.
Had that happen to them and devastated that it happened
to an entire community of people.
And so I, I am in favor of.
Moving forward. I think at this point,
I am sort of in the 75 to a hundred.
Range just
as a starting point.
Let's see how it works. Let's see what we get
for compliance data from.
Project home I'm I'm okay with using project home.
And if the needs seems.
Great to the point where it, you know, where we
have.
More data to work with.
Than than maybe we, we see another month.
Happen later, but
you know, let's, let's see what, what we get with
what we're willing to give at this point.
All right. Thank you very much, counsel. And you said
funding amount source I fund balance.
Sorry. I want to answer all the questions.
So I think I said the answer's yes, to the
first one.
Project home. Second one funding amount source.
75 to a hundred from fund balance.
And I think, you know,
to the extent we can make sure that these funds
are helping those people who are affected by.
The the ice.
Enforcement action. We should do. So I know it's impossible
to do that perfectly, but.
We should attempt to do, to, to measure it in
some way.
Thank you. Thank you.
And thank you Leisha because.
So, yes, we're do I want us to do something
as a community?
Project home sounds like
they're already established.
And I'm gonna go with Rosemarie at like,
50 K and then evaluate.
And, but to a max of 150.
By June 1st.
Okay, thank you very much.
Okay.
From the fun balance.
Yes.
Alright, well, I will be reasonably quick.
Yes, I am a yes. On the financial assistance. Many
people have expressed things that I believe.
Already I'm go, but I am gonna start with counselor
Matthews because he said that we have to consider everybody
in our community and we always, always do.
And from my perspective,
this is the, what we're talking about is our families
in our community who were harmed by something.
Absolutely unprecedented.
And something that I feel is.
un-American is not something that I, when I say that
pledge that I think is acceptable.
So I'm, I'm saying they are, they are everybody. And.
We need to help the members of our community.
I also keep in mind all the landlords who were
in here in February.
Talking about how they would do their best, not to
evict folks, but.
For some of them, the smaller landlords and even the
larger ones could feel the impact of, you know, not
receiving.
Rent. So I, I feel like we're advocating for them
as well.
And I don't know if I need to make any.
More points about that preferred delivery model.
I will talk about that because.
Through through the weekend. When I was thinking about if
this happened, I was very much a city must minister
because.
It is our responsible as it is our responsibility as
a council to make sure there's clear oversight, accountability for
the use of municipal funds. And the city is the
only way to do that. However,
I did get a lot more information about how project
home would verify, need, how they would limit.
Assistance to one month.
That they pay the landlords directly. Absolutely. That's the program
that they had set up a while ago.
For any kind of eviction.
Help.
Anyway, that just, it, it, it demonstrates to me that
there are meaningful safeguards in place, and that if we
support that approach, we not only would address immediate housing
stability need, but we would also meet our council responsibility
to ensure that the dollars are being used.
Responsibly and for what we wanted them to be used
for.
Funding amount source. I think I'm a one 50 kind
of gal on this one.
And the source is, as we've discussed.
And any additional program requirements or restrictions, guess all I
would say about the one 50 is we have heard
that there are south Portland families.
Needing an average of more than 2000 each that uses
more than one 50. So as far as us feeling.
Responsible and that we have, you know,
restricted that amount to only to those 80 families, it
feels like that's what we're doing.
So that's where I'm at.
Counselor Scott, could I offer.
Maybe a compromise between what I've heard.
I, I wonder if
counselors would be in favor of.
Going up to a hundred thousand dollars.
In the near term again on a reimbursement basis, not
on a full grant basis.
And reevaluating this in
a month. So I, so say again, you would see
us making.
Some type of initial donation and then reevaluating.
Yes to start it. I mean, I've heard, I think
from zero to 168 so just thinking about sort
of.
Do it, when you have a motion on the hold
on. Oh, I'm sorry.
Thank you, Rosemary. I don't know that we'll be doing
motions in the middle of a workshop. That's what I'm
saying. You don't, that's why you shouldn't be having this
conversation. All right. So we, excuse me, sorry. You shouldn't
be hearing until the audience members even. I'm sorry. I
think we actually can have this conversation workshop all.
Right. So we have had the workshop convers.
Conversation. Let's just say we've had the workshop conversation.
Our job was to answer these questions.
Questions. Mm-hmm I'm not sure what.
What are we doing with the.
Idea that, that there is now a recommendation that maybe.
I mean, sorry. I thought it was just workshop. Yeah.
Discussion. And conversation's, you can have this conversation.
Yes, counselor west. Yes. Why don't we agree on our
process? Is it going to be that for our next
meeting, there will be some kind of an order on
the agenda. That's fine. I think that's how debate amount
at that time.
We could, we could, and I think we will. And
I think that we have answered our workshop questions and
that therefore we can move to.
The next workshop item.
Point of order. Yes.
We, so I understand this is a workshop we are
actually not able to make, unless we were to adopt
the ordinance. We're not actually making any decisions. This is
advising.
City staff. I think where we have advised city staff
is to bring back an order.
That would say we're taking this from, we're taking these
monies and it will have an amount in it. And.
At that time, we'll discuss whether to amend the amount.
And just to be clear, I took the average of.
What everyone suggested. And it came out to about 94,000.
So I had round to around a hundred is probably
what would've would appear in the order. And you all
can debate that and you can put stipulations on it.
That we agree that we'll do more.
If the need presents itself, if you wanted to do
that, so, okay. Can't wait for the next meeting.
yes, counselor Walker. Can I ask a permanent parliamentary question?
You can ask it. We'll see who can answer it.
As this was a workshop item and we're agreeing to
move forward with it. Is there, is there a part
of our process that can skip the first read and
we can just go to the second read or? Yes,
it it's just an order. So no word that's one
order, one vote more done. And then the only delay
is, how on does it take us to cut the
check? Excellent. Thank you. That is what I want. Or
you're doing.
It on reimbursement basement. So that's, which is probably that's
exactly what I meant. Thank you. I think our council
feels satisfied. We've done the work. We understand what we
recommended.
And we will call this workshop.
Done bike share program.
And ordinance is our next workshop item.
Great. Thank you, counselor. So next up.
We have a presentation from members of our sustainability staff.
If I can get to that item.
To talk about
the possibility or counsel's interest in standing up a bike
share program.
And an associated ordinance that would govern.
If such a program were established here, some of the
guardrails.
Guardrails that it would need to operate under. And so
I'm gonna turn it over to our sustainability director, Julie
Rosenbach and our sustainability program manager, Megan Daley.
Who will talk a little bit or about what a
bike program bike share program is? Why an ordinance would
be important, et cetera. Ultimately, the, the guidance which I
will, again at the end put up on the screen
is does discounts support the framework?
That's been established or do you have any additional tweaks
and also.
Any suggestions, if you want to go, the, if you
agree that in ordinance is important to have in place,
do you have any comments?
Or suggestions on that for, for staff to bring forward
for first reading.
In the future. So I'm trying to buy you time
while you figure out the screen share did you
get it?
Here we go.
All right. Thank you. Thank you.
Okay. Wow. Hi everybody. Julie Rosenbach sustainability director. We need
to come closer to that microphone. I'm not sure that's
for the TV folks. Okay.
How's that I think that's kind okay.
Wow. So Megan's already set it up.
I, I just want to frame this.
Discussion.
The idea of a bike share program.
As Megan's gonna talk about is in our one climate
future plan.
We have been noodling with this idea of a bike
share program for a couple of years and it tad
fits and starts. And it started with our former transportation
program coordinator. Then we had sort of a nude, temporary
staff who, who didn't.
Didn't quite work out.
And so it's
it's it's been, it's undergone some different iterations and good
times and bad times.
Megan started in my office about.
Seven months ago.
Eight months ago and has picked this up along with
so many other things in earnest.
And has set it back sort of on the right
track. And so that's my introduction to Megan is gonna
take it over.
Now. Thank you.
Megan Daley sustainability program manager in the sustainability office.
So, yes, the purp
purp here we got the purpose of this presentation is
to bring forward a bike share ordinance framework.
And to assess city council's interest in bringing a bike
share program.
To south Portland, they go hand in hand.
So in this presentation, we're gonna provide some background information
on bikeshare.
Key findings from a public survey that we ran.
A proposed framework.
For this bikeshare ordinance.
As well as a brief overview of what a bike
share program in south Portland might look like to help
inform your deliberations.
And then finally we have a few questions.
To guide the, the
the input that we received from counsel.
So
a little bit of background on why we are bringing
this forward.
So
first the motivation for exploring a bike share reflects goals
included in the one climate future plan.
Approximately 30% of south Portland's.
Portland's greenhouse gas emissions come from the transportation sector.
And a key milestone in the plan is that 5%
of all trips should be completed by bike.
By 2040 and the plan.
Also speaks to the need to revisit efforts, to launch
a bike share program in the cities.
Of Portland and south Portland, Portland has already established theirs.
There's south Portland obviously is still considering this.
So
evidence that is based on the experience of small.
Medium and large cities.
Shows that bikeshare can benefit.
Generate a range of benefits.
Benefits. This includes increasing the percentage of people.
Who commute by bike.
A nationwide study showed that when both transit.
And bike share are available.
50% of users used both.
And additionally, all of this can translate to.
Really substantial reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.
Emissions. So there are two primary reasons that we think.
It's prudent to consider moving.
Bike share program into the transportation mix in south Portland.
First is to facilitate a mode shift.
Away from car trips to bike trips and the second.
Is to increase equitable access.
To resilient transportation options.
So D reduced car dependency will reduce carbon emissions.
Emissions and bikeshare can help fill those first and last
mile connectivity gaps so that people can.
Better access, public transit. If they're not close to a
bus stop, or if they arrive at a bus stop
and they just need to go that last little bit.
A key consideration for our bikeshare program.
Would be thinking about
interoperability with Portland's bike share system. So for example,
we heard the example of it being difficult to get
to Portland from SMCC or other parts of south Portland.
So if a student at SMCC.
Has an internship in another part of the city or
needs to get across the river.
Bike share might help them do that more effectively.
Experience also shows that when.
People engage in using bikeshare that extends to their bike
use.
Outside of bike shares. So it it's building a bike
culture and people use bikes more frequently.
Outside of bike share with their personal bikes.
Bikes. And we know that with more cyclists on the
road.
That increases visibility. It makes the road safer for everybody.
So the second piece.
Is that bike share can lower the bar.
To entry for riding a bike, it can be more
convenient and cost effective.
For those residents who might not be able to invest
in a bike.
Or it's difficult for them to maintain their own bike
or store storage can be a real problem.
By chair can also attract new bike riders. It's a
low commitment way of testing it out. Do I like
biking around? Is this something I wanna do in the
future more? And then I can make an investment and
find bikes share can contribute to.
Transportation resilience. So if transit isn't reaching the places that
people need to go.
This might help fill that gap while promoting.
Sustainability equity and connectivity.
So
again, a bike share program we feel is an investment
in south Portland's future.
Addressing transportation challenges while promoting.
Those pieces of sustainability, equity and connectivity.
So
together broader input on a bike share program.
We conducted a public survey.
And the survey was open for two months, between November 28th
and January 30th.
We sent out.
Mail surveys to a random sample of 750.
Addresses in south Portland, we use city newsletters and social
media, which had a digital survey link.
We had mailing lists and the same sustainability office, social
media.
We had flyers and handouts at key locations and events
throughout the city that also had the digital survey link.
And we also had physical paper surveys available at city
hall so that people could fill them out and drop
them in the box.
And we received responses from every neighborhood.
In the city.
So when we asked key question of how interested would
you be in having a bike share program in south
Portland?
52% of residents.
Residents indicated that they would be either very or somewhat
interested in having a bike share program in south Portland.
33% of respondents.
Respondents said they were not interested or not interested at
all.
And 15% of residents were neutral.
Notably 40.
1% of respondents who currently, who don't currently own a
bike.
Cuz we did ask that question.
We're interested in a bike share program.
So 41% of folks who don't have a bike already.
Are interested in bike share.
Among the residents who are interested in bike share.
53% said they would like to use bikeshare for multiple
purposes.
Purposes. So running errands was the most frequent response.
With recreation and exercise being the next most frequent.
But it's interesting that the majority of the recreation and
exercise responses, because this was a, a select, all that
applied.
70% of those folks.
Indicated some other use that they would like to combine.
With recreation and exercise.
Commuting and connecting to transit were less frequent responses.
Responses. So when we asked folks, if they had concerns
about a bike share in south Portland,
lack of bike, infrastructure and traffic.
Concerns were by far the most frequent responses.
Responses, these received almost double.
Any of the other responses. So.
That really stood out as something that people were worried
about.
User skill cost, helmet, availability, and station locations.
Locations, all received roughly in the vicinity of a hundred.
Responses each. And this was a select all question so
people could choose multiple of these.
We also ask an open-ended question at the end of
the survey.
And people provided their input and we grouped these into
some of the, the major.
Things we were hearing. So first was that people were
really asking for.
A concurrent investment in transit system. So this pairs really
nicely with the discussion with Metro tonight.
But people wanted to be able to connect these two
things.
The second was that people.
Wanted regional connectivity, so that interoperability with Portland.
For example, being able to do a one-way trip from
south Portland to downtown Portland, without having to park their
car was something that people really thought would be valuable.
People reiterated their strong concern about safety.
They wanted bike lanes and less dangerous road design.
Particularly on Broadway Westbrook and in the mall area.
There's also a desire for training. This is both for
the cyclists who would use the bike share program.
But also for drivers.
They're on both sides of that equation.
Just safer.
Safer road behavior for both cyclists and drivers.
And then finally there was concern about.
The potential costs of a program and questions about whether.
This is the best inve investment relative to other things
that we could be putting money toward.
And this was mentioned in a little less than 10%
of the open-ended responses.
Responses. So
the key survey takeaways are, we did learn that a
majority of respondents are interested in a bike share program.
And that bike share can serve.
Multiple needs and purposes in our city.
Notably many residents own bikes, but are not riding. And
that, that has a lot to do with those concerns
about road safety.
And traffic.
Concerns. And so those are things we need to be
looking at in tandem.
So any efforts to develop a bike share program.
Should be coupled with improvements to bike infrastructure.
And education and in some good news, the city has
received a community action grant.
To move forward on developing a citywide.
Bike PED master plan. And we've also been taking concrete
steps, like the launch of the cash Thornton neighborhood, byway.
That provides a safe route for our middle schoolers to
bike or walk to school.
And we also have our complete streets policy.
And complete streets, design manual.
In place. So I think we are already taking meaningful
steps on those infrastructure questions.
Questions and, and hopefully those improvements will be realized alongside
any potential bike share program.
Okay. So getting into the framework.
We incorporated our information gathering efforts, as well as guidelines
developed by the national association of city transportation officials or
NATO. So if you hear me say natto, it's referring
to that organization that developed these guidelines.
The framework that we're putting forward has three areas, general
terms and conditions.
General operations and system design.
So under general terms and conditions.
We propose, including just a basic.
Definition of a bike share system. So what are we
regulating?
And building off of the city of Portland's adapting that
to our context, it could be something like a system
of bicycles or electric bicycles that is made available for
rent for general public use.
Generally for short periods of time to include docs for
storing bicycles when not in use.
So that's the kind of parameters that we would be
setting on what we're regulating.
We also recommend, including a provision that any bike share
operator.
Would have to seek legal permission via a license permit
or contract or some combination thereof.
To operate. We are recommended that those be renewed annually.
And that just means that.
If the operator is not complying with the, the agreement.
We have the ability to not renew that in the
future.
We also recommend that the city.
Require the bike share operator.
To provide indemnity and hold appropriate insurance.
There's also a provision to clarify that the bike share
operator will be responsible for any additional costs.
That might stem from bike share. So that might be
increased repair or maintenance costs.
That stem from having bike share in the city.
Second.
Under general conditions, we would like the ordinance to spell
out safety and maintenance requirements.
So first the operator should comply with local state and
federal safety standards. For example, the type of equipment that's
used should meet those basic standards.
Standards. It's also possible to set a maximum e-bike speed.
So for example, natto recommends a maximum.
Speed of 20 miles per hour.
For a bike share program, but council could consider something
lower. For example, 15 miles per hour. If they felt
the 20 miles per hour was not appropriate.
Finally, there's the possibility to limit the number of bikes
in the system, or define how regularly these should be
rebalanced cuz a bikeshare system. You occasionally need to move
the bikes around to make sure the bikes are available
at all stations at all times.
With regard to maintenance, NATO recommends full monthly checks.
And weekly street checks.
Checks. We believe that more frequent checks for e-bikes would
be wise. And this could be on the order of
every one to three days.
The ordinance should also specify what.
Records need to be kept of that maintenance.
And how they should be submitted to the city so
that we can make sure that the bike operator is
doing what they said they were going to do.
So we also recommend that the city of south Portland
reserve the right.
To approve key aspects of the system design in some
cities.
They leave it up to the, the bike share operator.
To make those decisions, but we think it would be
important for south Portland to have control.
Over those aspects. So this can include pricing and payment.
Options, for example, a monthly.
Or annual membership that could reduce the cost for frequent
riders.
And cash payment options to reduce access barriers.
Barriers, notably. We really want to ensure that the pricing
is affordable for short trips.
Trips while being less cost-effective for longer.
Trips to reduce competitions with businesses that might provide bike
rentals on a longer duration basis.
We also strongly recommend allowing only bikes that are docked
at a fixed station. Some bike shares allow you to
park wherever you.
Arrive. We do not recommend this. We've had discussions with
our.
Parks and recreation department and public works director. And so
these will be docked stations in.
Areas that are away from sidewalks, but in the public
right of way.
We also recommend the inclusion of e-bikes.
E-bikes and the reason for this is that it extends
the range that people.
Can go using the bike share system.
But we wanna mix potentially of these conventional pedal bikes
and e-bikes for example, Portland has a 50 50 mix.
And finally we think that the ordinance should allow south
Portland to approve the station locations. We wanna make sure
that these are in locations that are going to be
close to important.
Services that our residents need to access.
Okay. So what
what would a potential bike share program look like in
south Portland, I'm just gonna provide a high level overview.
So you can envision how it might work.
So, first of all, we think that there are five
key principles that should guide any potential program.
That might come to fruition. This is, we want it
to be accessible.
Affordable safe, transit, oriented, and reliable.
And in the following side, we just talk a little
bit about.
What that would look like in practice.
So in terms of operations, the operator will be responsible
for launching and managing the bike fleets and stations on
a day-to-day basis.
That includes payments.
Payments as well as the installation of the stations in
the spring and the removal in the fall, because they
get removed over the winter season.
We proposed that the bike shares start as a one
year pilot.
With 40 bikes across eight stations with 20 conventional and
20 ES assist.
eAssist. And again, this, this notion of requiring the operator
to be interoperable with the Portland bike share, we think
is a really important piece.
In terms of safety, we would like to require all
users and indeed, most bike share operators would require this.
To read and sign an agreement to follow the rules
of the road.
And to strongly encourage helmet use as a side note.
Adults over the age of 16 are not required to
wear bike helmets in Maine and bike share operators. Typically
don't provide them because of logistical and sanitary reasons.
Reasons, but there are options that we can pursue for
increasing access to helmets.
Helmets, such as partnering with the bicycle coalition of Maine
to do helmet giveaways.
Giveaways in the spring when people are starting up their
bike season.
Et cetera. We also wanna have educational signage at each
of the bike stations as, as a, an additional reminder.
Of how to bike safely.
And what the rules of the road are.
For maintenance, the operator will be responsible for the day-to-day
monitoring of the, the bikes themselves, as well as the
stations.
Stations, but there are two options that have been presented
to us as.
Possibilities for performing maintenance.
The first is that the bike share hires a local
field technician, who would.
Conduct that maintenance on a regular basis.
There's also the possibility that the bike share operator could
contract with a local bike repair shop who had performed
the needed maintenance.
Okay. So
funding. This is an, an important question.
The establishment of a bikeshare program in south Portland was
identified as a high priority.
By main.in their three year work plan.
Based on this, we anticipate $100,000 of state funding being
available in 2026.
Pending counsel's interest in pursuing the program.
However, this would require
a 20, $20,000 match in the FY 27 C I
P.
To unlock this funding and there would be no funding
obligation beyond year one.
If the program continues into the future, there are three
funding sources, which based on.
An estimate from tandem mobility, which runs Portland's bike share
program.
Would include 20% user fees and memberships.
60% sponsorships and advertising revenue.
And 20% grants or municipal budget.
So given for the potential of bikeshare to address south
Portland's climate and transportation goals.
By promoting sustainability.
Equity and connectivity. We request city council's feedback to determine
the trajectory and next steps.
Specifically staff is seeking guidance on whether this regulatory framework.
Meets south Portland's needs or whether there are adjustments that
council would like to see prior to any further consideration.
And
should city staff proceed with the formal drafting of ordinance
language to bring to council for further consideration.
So I'd just like to thank you for.
Bringing bikeshare to the workshop schedule. We really appreciate the
opportunity to have the conversation and we welcome your questions.
Questions. Thank you very much.
Is Julie saying anything?
In addition. Okay. So thank you.
Alright, go back one slide. Yep. Thank you. That I
think we have our first question. Can, can you go
back, Mike actually do mind clicking off cause I've got
a, oh sure. I've I've backed it up. Even. I
think those.
Considerations are important, but
the first threshold of question is, is this something council's
even interested in? And then.
If, yes, we kind of get into those two questions
that proposed by.
By me again. So thank you. Do you have what
you need counselor? We should be coming up there in
a second.
Okay, so we're gonna do two different. Oh wow. We
are so tricky. Takes a little bit to.
There you go. Oh, no. I thought we were gonna
see something different. Okay.
Okay. I don't think we need to answer those questions.
Questions quite yet, because that's usually what we do at
the end. So did anyone have questions of our presenter?
Thank you, counselor, Wes.
Wes first. I wanna point out that there's a discrepancy.
In the match because the staff report.
Says the match would be 25,000.
But I believe your oral remarks and the memo.
Say 20,000.
Yes, that's correct. So,
the, that amount was supposed to be updated, but the
actual amount, and we confirmed with.
GP cog today is a $20,000 match. Okay. And have
you, where, where do you think the eight stations would
go? That would be something that we would have to
determine. We did receive feedback in this survey we're regarding
priority areas. So there's a lot of considerations that.
Go into station location.
But that would be
a later step. And you said that you would be
contracting with a company to run the program.
Have you talked to any companies or do you have
any idea what company or how you'd go about choosing
one?
So, for example, the city of Portland went out to
RFP to select their bike share operator.
We have had conversations with tandem mobility, which runs Portland's
program.
Just to understand how their program works, how they manage
their operations.
And what that could look like.
Thanks. Those are my questions.
Questions. Thank you. Further questions, counselor, Scott.
Do you have any sense of.
What the Portland
bike share kind of size and costs are. And, and
it sounds like you have not yet reached out to
a private company about.
A south or option with 40 bikes.
Bikes. So the information we did get from tandem mobility
was.
To understand what that $120,000 of funding could achieve.
And it was the, the 40 bikes and eight stations.
Stations. Okay. So one 20 gets you 40 bikes.
Bikes 20 regular 20 e-bikes across south Portland.
Yes in eight stations for a year, for a year.
Okay.
Other questions.
Questions. I've got a quick question. The surveying of course,
was residents.
Residents only. Right. Mm-hmm so just maybe even based
on Portland's experience, what do we know about tourism?
Interest in the bike share in a bike share program.
That was not a question that we asked on the
survey.
I know that Portland
targets a range of users. They do have bike share
along their wider front. And so I think that is
something that.
Is used potentially by tourists, but we don't have data
available on that. That would be something that.
We could ask Portland if they have any additional information,
but not something we have readily available.
All right. And just, I only ask.
Because I'm just thinking are tourists love these things and
they'll steal all the bikes that were meant for residents
or.
Or tourists, like help drive the program actually? Or how
does that work? yeah. What tourists. Okay.
I so not recently, but.
When sort of a year after Portland.
Established their bike share program. I called all the bike
shops in Portland. And then in fact, there's a couple
of.
At least one, maybe two.
Companies that just go and rent bikes to tourists.
And so they said
Hey, we haven't seen our business go down.
If anything, the bike shops are like, well, we might
see a little uptick, but it, it wa there wasn't
really any major impact on, on their.
Businesses. So I'm, I'm not sure it would be something.
That tourists would seek out the way that I, I,
I know that Megan covered it, but the way that
we would structure the pricing.
Is not for take this break out for the afternoon.
To go somewhere. It would be if the pricing would.
Encourage people to take it from one dock to the
next and dock it.
So more of a transportation filler than sort of a,
a recreation.
Of a vehicle for, for recreation.
The other thing I just want to make sure is
that.
We, we have an idea of where some bike.
You know, racks could be placed. And of course we
have some serv feedback. I'm sorry.
I think what we would start with probably though is
like a grouping.
Or, you know, a destination based.
You know, like an SMC, we are, we talked with
SMC like a year or two ago and we were
considering this and they're like, yeah, absolutely. It makes sense
to Broadway, you know, have a.
A bike share station in SMCC. I don't think having
eight stations spread all over the city is what we
would start with. We would group them.
Some way and make sure that it fit with.
The next place that you want to dock your bike.
Okay. So, but that would come, that would come, come
after an order, meaning it's not like.
Oh, we're taking one in SMCC and we're taking another
one in the mall. And then, you know, the remaining
sixth, blah, blah, you would maybe choose an area of
the city that made sense for a pilot program. Perfect.
And put all eight in that area. I mean, not
to little, but I don't know that we would spread
all eight across.
The city that
okay. That wouldn't make the pilot successful.
All right. Thank you.
Counselor, Scott, sorry. One last question.
Is it acceptable for the match program to have a
sponsor provide $20,000 and that be the $20,000 match from
the city? Or does it have to come from the
city?
Funds to be the match.
And if you don't have an answer, that's totally fine.
This such a good question. It is acceptable to the,
for the, for the bike share program, but I don't
know that it's acceptable for D O T funding. I'd
have to look into that one more. Okay. Thank you.
All right. Any other questions, counselors?
Council pride.
Would this program, which seems to have some.
Economic bent to it. Be something that we could fund
at least partially with TIF dollars.
So that is actually something that the city of Portland
is looking into. It depends which type of TIFF I
believe, and, and Scott and.
Josh would be much the city manager.
And would be much better able to answer that question,
but it is something that is.
Being explored in Portland.
Can we, we can look into that. If this was
something else was interested in.
Okay. All right. Thank you. Any other counselor questions before
we open it up for public comment?
Sorry. Oh, counselor Scott.
Is is the, the grant I assume, is, is part
of.
This program design. So that's like a hundred and a
hundred thousand dollars. $20,000 is part of this program design.
I'm just wondering if there is like a.
Four bike or eight bike.
Pilot smaller.
Option that you might have considered for one.
Or two areas of the city and not 40 and
eight stations.
Stations, sorry. Julie knows a little bit more of the
history of this, but there was an initial proposal to
have a phased in approach with a potentially a smaller
number of stations initially. But in discussions that we had
with folks who have worked in bikeshare as well as.
With the city of Portland, their transportation director.
Density is a key question in terms of making.
Like share successful. So we opted to for.
Look at a slightly larger pilot.
Because that density could help people make better use of
it, potentially. Cuz if there's only two stations.
Stations that might really limit what people can do with
it. And thereby unnecessarily restrict potential usership.
I very much appreciate that. Thank you.
Thanks. All right. I, I wanna add that.
While, when we were thinking about the faced approach, like
way back when we had to submit tax projects.
If you see the line item in the D O
T.
T funding plan. It's it's $300,000.
But we scaled it back to a hundred thousand dollars
because we didn't want to come and ask you for
$65,000. So that's, I feel like the minimum.
That would make for a successful or not pilot. Thank
you. Yeah.
Okay. I think we're gonna open this up to public
comment. The item.
Bike share program.
Any public comment on it.
Thank you.
Good evening counselors. Can you guys hear me? Okay. Carl
EPK, I'm 2 91 pine street.
I'm on the bicycle pedestrian committee and have been for
as long as it's existed.
Right Rosemary. I also should let you know that I've
worked for tool design now for a couple years and.
I was with PAX and GP cog for 12 years.
I know a little bit about.
Bicycle infrastructure. And this, this, this thing that you're considering,
couple of things.
Also, I was a consultant on the one climate future.
Effort that was done jointly with Portland.
Focusing on the transportation elements to that, to that study.
Mike Sharon was one of the recommendations in that I
think as Julie mentioned,
and something that's key about it is to think about
it as infrastructure, just like you would buses.
Buses transit.
Roads ferrys et cetera.
And it, it it's complimentary option to transit, to driving,
to walking to everything.
That said when you build new infrastructure,
a one year pilot.
Although it may give you some data and give you
some information about the program.
In a place like Maine, where our.
One year is really only five months.
I highly recommend that you think about this as a
multi-year commitment.
Even though that's not, what's been proposed.
That will more, more likely to have success with a
program. If you do decide to go forward with it
and you can do those metrics over multiple seasons.
Seasons another important thing is that bicycling is not.
Within just one municipality it's regional, believe it or not.
And that's another reason to support the e-bike aspect to
this.
He likes, let you go a lot further. I think
a lot of you're aware that the Eastern trail bridges
that are in Scarborough are being built as we speak.
And we'll be able to bike from bug light. Well,
from Portland, all the way to Kennebunk very soon.
Basically off-road and that's, this is hu. A huge win
for the region.
So really just important to think about this as regional
and therefore. Yes, I, and I saw Carter's thought 40
bikes. What were we doing with eight stations?
Stations. If you develop a system that's, you know, that
integrates with the Portland system, which is why they're looking
at it that way.
You don't just have whatever it is. Eight 40 bikes
and eight stations. You really have that reciprocity with a
system that already exists.
Exists. Can't exactly go out to bid that way, but
it's, it helps with making the system and the opportunity
much more successful and therefore the tax dollars.
Are more effective.
And I think that that's, if anybody needs any other
questions about this or the resource to reach out to
me,
I really hope that you guys move forward with this
it's important. And I think it is the future.
For south Portland in the region. 30 seconds. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Anyone else have a comment on this item. Come on
up.
So, this is a really funny position for me to
be in because I love bicycling very, very much. I'm
the owner of lighthouse bikes down the street.
As my life's mission to get as many people say
name. Oh, Leah day. Yeah. It's my life's mission to
get as many people on bicycles as possible. I think
it's an excellent way to experience the world.
But here I am saying that I am opposed to
bike share for south Portland for real, really three.
Major reasons. The first one quickly is safety. I think
you guys have all thought of that, but.
People are not gonna wear helmets that are on these
bike share programs. They just don't.
Don't I've never seen. I've very rarely seen somebody on
a bike share program, bike with a helmet.
Two, the people who are riding them, don't have access
to maps and all that. They might have a sign
at the kiosk, but they're not gonna know where to
go.
For, and I'm thinking about be who I'm taking them
every day more, the tourist aspect.
I think also the infrastructure for biking around here is
very complicated. And without someone talking you through for new
bikers, without someone talking them through how to get across
the bridge, how to get through complicated intersections, it's gonna
be a cluster. I think a lot, especially for you're
talking about hooking up with the poor Portland by there.
We can't seem to figure out how to handle.
That bridge now with people who are really accustomed to
biking across it. As far as you go on the
sidewalk, do you go on the road? What do you
do?
So you're just adding a lot of craziness. And then
also when I, my bike shop is located right at
the bottom of the bridge.
Once a week, a bike comes in a bike share
program.
The headset is loose. The brakes don't work. The batteries
died or they're lost.
Every week and they, and they don't know what to
do. They don't know where to go. They don't know
where their bike shops are.
And then the last thing in the safety concern is
that there's a thing about biker responsibility. People who don't
own these bikes, who don't care for them as well.
They're also not checking in and out with a real
person. They're just checking it and going. So there's a
lot more kind of, you know, just freewheeling on their
bikes.
Bikes. The other thing is, I guess I should just
jump to this as a business owner. It's really hard
to run a small business.
I'm like I hire 11 people. I play 11 people.
Every year, I barely making it through. And the idea
that you're gonna consider hiring a national.
Company to come in with a bike share program. It's
just like,
how am I supposed to support my business and the
people who work there.
I've tried to get in conversations with this.
Previously before today, I feel like it's, I've been avoided.
And I just think that we can think more creativity
creatively. We have, you know, you're talking about $20,000.
That's a lot of money for bikes. You could get
a lot of people, bikes.
Bikes in south Portland, they could own their bikes. 30
seconds. You could do bicycle classes. You could do all
kinds of interesting things. There's a gear hub. It's a
model how to get people on bikes. There's the police
department has a hundreds of bikes in their basement. Let's
find a way to get those bikes and get them
into people's hands. Cuz they're just bikes have been stolen
over time.
Yes. So there's a, there's a many reasons that I'm
opposed this idea, and I'd love to just continue the
conversation, how to get people on bikes. But I don't,
I think this is very premature to do it this
way.
Thank you very much.
Go ahead. Your name. Hi, my name is Twain Braden,
and I'm. I have the privilege of being.
Leah day's husband and also her.
Pro bono legal counsel.
So a couple of things. First of all, I think
she did sum it up. This idea of weaponizing, a
large national company with a small, only 11 employee business.
I think it is a very powerful force.
And it's not a, it's not a fair fight.
I think that one of the things that I've seen
recently when I've had the privilege of being able to
travel.
Is the difference between
infrastructure as bicycles and infrastructure, as we all commonly know
it.
I was in Copenhagen last year and the extent of
their signage.
Their literature, their bike lanes. It's an accepted part of
their, the fabric of their city.
If you all want to do something, do what the
people in that survey said, which is.
Improve our infrastructure.
Find a way to make biking in the city, safe,
invest that money, and you will see an, an exponential
increase in bicycling. And there's a disconnect between.
The suggestion that somehow bikeshare programs are gonna clear the
skies.
And clearing the skies through more bike usage.
Your infrastructure that you build for bicycling.
That will have a direct connection between.
Your interest in clearing up the skies and environmental and
using more.
People powered.
You know, instead of, instead of cars,
there is absolutely a direct correlation between.
The amount of money cities.
Invest in their infrastructure. And by that I don't mean
bike share programs. I mean, those bike lanes in the
science.
Go to these other cities, Davis, California, all these other
places that, that have invested in it. It's a huge
benefit to their communities and yes, a five month winter.
Is is absolutely true. And the other thing that you'll
see in these places that have invested in these bikeshare
programs is these heaps of bicycles with these loose headsets.
Headsets ditched on people's lawns. They find a way to
hack the system.
And no matter how you lean on this national company,
one showed up on peaks island on my lawn last
year.
I called this national company. There was nobody there. I
called again, there was this bicycles probably worth a thousand
dollars, just de deposited 'em on, on my lawn on
peaks island. And I couldn't find a way to get
through to whoever it was to repatriate their thousand dollars
bicycle. So it is a very difficult program to do
it. Maybe a city of a greater size than south
Portland.
Could effectively do it, but maybe after investing in the
infrastructure that you need 30 seconds, so that the people
who are here who are living here can actually bike
safely around their communities.
Thank you very much. Obviously we oppose it. Thank you.
Thank you.
Jack proposed a Walnut street.
Okay, there we go.
I got a few questions.
Questions. How do I get to these bike locations from
my house?
Do I drive my car to get a bike? Do
I ride the bus to get a bike?
You know, depending on where the bikes are.
Also
another question is, do I have to have insurance to
ride the city bike?
My own insurance or are we covered by the city
or.
Whatever
and
see, I did have.
One other question.
Oh, the infrastructure, just the follow up here.
We don't have the infrastructure.
Like they were talking about like these cities, Portland.
If you want to say, well, Portland's doing this. And
so Portland would like to go along. Portland's.
Portland's future plans are to make a walking city.
Okay. They, they want to stop the roads going into
Portland. Cut 'em off so they can walk. They're building
these condos. They're building these apartments.
Apartments. It's gonna be people walking and biking.
And that's what basically we're hearing here, the cities that
have these bicycle.
You know, bike paths and, and.
They've done it for a number of years.
And they now they've they have it. And it's basically
in walking areas.
Areas, and we just don't have that infrastructure and who's
gonna pay for the infrastructure for the bikes, the city,
the taxpayers.
Taxpayers when we have to get infrastructure.
Paint the roads right now, you know, you're riding on
some of these roads and you're riding on the side
of the road, not on the sidewalk.
And cars are going by basically one way or the
other at 30 or 35 miles an hour or more.
And there's not even any bike lanes.
So there's an infrastructure cost. So who's gonna pay for
that.
So tho those are my questions. If you know, if
I can get.
Somebody, you know, some answers. Thank you. Thank you very
much.
We do try to answer questions, but let me just
see if anyone else wants to speak. Aha. Yeah.
Little Weinberg.
Hart street and I'm a biker. I have an e-bike
I'm.
I'm 80 years old. So I don't pedal as much
as I used to.
But I love to bike.
I bike.
Trying to wipe year around whenever the roads are clear.
I bike. I don't care if it's over freezing.
It's above freezing. I might.
I'm Mike and
the main thing I'm concerned with is infrastructure.
That's what we need.
And
to, to yeah. Get.
Like they say
there are plenty of bikes. People.
People could get bikes, very cheaply if they really wanted
to bike.
The reason they don't want to bike is because of
the infrastructure.
And so if we took that $20,000.
And help out with the infrastructure.
That would be much better.
Spent money, money spent.
And also
I noticed that this, I may be wrong on this,
but.
In the proposal.
The funding, the hundred thousand.
From the D O T only goes for one year.
After that the city would have to come up with
all the money.
Which would make it 120,000.
So that's a big chunk.
That you have to consider.
So I
I'm all in favor of biking.
And I think that
if, if there was more places to bike,
and of course
I definitely want to keep it legal.
To bike on the
Eastern trail.
And on the green belt and also on the sidewalks,
cuz there's some talk about.
Banning that if they, if they ban those things,
that would be the end of biking.
In this city. So I'm worried about that too.
But I, I think this proposal.
Would be the money would be better spent.
In infrastructure. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Anyone else?
Come on. Come on. Don't be shy.
Hi, I'm Jeff Woodbury. I live on Hobart street in
us. I'm a member of the south Portland bike PED
committee.
I'm gonna bike the hand that feeds me. .
I agree with Richard Matthews. It's like, we have to be
extremely careful where we spend money nowadays.
Nowadays, and I don't see this as a good solution
for south Portland.
Orland. And I have a few reasons how many people
here show of hands have ever used bike share.
All right. A handful of people have I have nine.
Bike and scooter apps on my phone. I use this
a lot and I use it in big cities, New York,
Los Angeles.
Austin Vilnius Lithuania.
Smaller city I've ever used it in is probably Portland
or Santa Barbara.
Which has a great program.
They're all, as you said, sir, you are gonna drive
somewhere.
Park your car and then bike around and go back
and drive away.
Where are people going to go? Where are they gonna
take it to? We're gonna put a locations in. We've
gotta keep 'em tight so you can go from one
to another to, no, I'm not doing a trip to
the mall. I'm not gonna grab one in my neighborhood
and go somewhere. I'm gonna drive to milk Creek and
then maybe drive to bug like back.
I'm going to
maybe go from SMCC.
To mill Creek and back if we've got pack these
together.
In a very close area.
And as you say, the money goes away after a
year, somebody said that.
And so, and if we've got all these bikes inthe.
The cop's basement. Why aren't we hauling these out and
starting a.
Portland maker space and start building bikes and putting 'em
on the road.
And as an avid bike rider. Yeah. The streets are
terrible. The drivers are terrible. Yeah.
I love biking. I won't see more of it.
I just don't see south Orland being the tourist destination,
that's going to drive it.
That's all.
Thank thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Anyone else?
Rosemary DeAngelos pleasant deal. As you can see.
I the, the, while I also serve on the bicycle
pedestrian committee, we did not take a position on this.
Because the committee was very divided.
Divided. And so I support what the last several speakers
have said.
I also don't support this program.
For a number of reasons and some of them Leah
already raised, but I think.
Safety is certainly one, no access to maps.
Maps infrastructure. Those are all issues that concern me.
I think I also have concern about.
People being responsible for bikes and.
And the, the reason there are a lot of bikes.
Bikes already in the basement of the police department is
because people have just abandoned them.
And I just see this as.
A national company.
Coming in where anybody can pick up a bike.
First of all, they're very expensive based on the rates
that were given to us at the bicycle pedestrian committee.
It's they're expensive to use, so they're not going to
be attracting.
Regular use by residents for, from what I can see.
I, I think that it's been said by a number
of people, $20,000.
Is a lot of money. And again, is this the
best way that we want to spend it?
When, when we, when we are.
As counselor. Matthew said, we're in a budget prices. Things
are not.
Yet we're not in a good place. I think the
helmet giveaway.
Is is a, is . I, I could use the
term. It is a giveaway.
It, it's just sort of a silly idea, you know,
as somebody gonna go and.
Get a helmet and then carry it around with them
for when they're gonna use their bike share, you know,
they're gonna be, oh, I'm really glad I got my
helmet here. You know, I can now rent a, I
mean, it just like, it makes no sense to me.
The other thing that concerns me is a aside from
the visual clutter, you though, you've never been to my
house.
The the first of all, asking if you ask for
the inclusion.
They're asking for the inclusion of e-bikes. If you do
that, the next item that's up on the agenda that
we've been waiting for since six o'clock, you're gonna have
to make a change because if you're going to include.
E-bikes in this, then you have to be looking at,
because e-bikes right now are not allowed on our green
bell on our walkway.
But the, the last thing is.
The issue of advertising. And I know I'm gonna run
out time, but the issue of advertising, like we have
no control over who advertises on these bikes. Is it
even product or things that we care about or that
we want? I mean, what what's going to be.
The outcome of
of the result of the, of advertising that could be
products that we just absolutely oppose. Thank you.
Thank you. Let the record reflect that the meeting started
at six 30. Yes. Six 30. I'm sorry. I'm.
council is Jeff Steinberg cottage road.
My bike has been hanging.
Upside down in our garage since last November, when I
had to put it away.
And the day like today makes me think this is
about the time to put that.
Bike back on its feet and get it on it
myself. So I've got a lot to say about.
Bikes in south Portland, and I really appreciate the three
minutes.
That I get to do it.
But I know those three minutes are not gonna contain
me altogether as somebody who sits in this audience quite
frequently.
I often have things I'd like to.
Sing out that I think you need to hear.
And I just want to advise you against.
Encouraging that kind of behavior among those of those of
us in the audience.
Because it will lead to a kind of magic let's
stick to the topic. Well, the three minutes.
Dwindling now.
South Portland.
Is a wonderful place to do a lot of things.
But it's not a wonderful place to be on a
bike.
With some exceptions.
And so I joined.
My fellow citizens in saying.
Although it's hard not to be sympathetic to the idea
of getting more people on bikes and making people, making
bikes.
Bikes more available to lots of people.
We really shouldn't do that. It seems to me until
we can feel more confident.
About where it is we're asking them or allowing them
to bike.
Mount lagoon was a terrible cook.
But every once in a while, we had to go
to a picnic or a party at my aunt Laverne's
house. And then you had to put up with my
aunt Laverne's cooking.
But the last thing you'd want to do is to
encourage a lot of other people to partake in that
cooking, because it just wasn't good.
It wasn't good.
And I think there's a kind of analogy there. And
then when we hear.
That in Maine, you don't have to wear a helmet.
I didn't even know that. Yeah. I didn't need that.
And that
the people in bikeshare are even less likely than the
rest of us.
To have helmets or to use helmets.
That just seems like
a further foolishness.
So sympathetic or I may be, and altogether interested in
this topic though. I am and sure though, I am
that I will have further things to say that I
haven't thought of. Now when you're discussing.
I'll not say that because sometimes the epitome of being
a good citizen is no going to keep your mouth
shut. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Anyone else?
Okay. Public comment on the bike share item is closed.
We have been asked to answer some questions here. Counselors
have some, yeah. Oh, we also did have questions that
were asked. Yeah.
So Julian and Megan might need your help with some
of these. There was the first question was how does
someone get from their home to one of these locations
to make it.
Worthwhile to use the bikes instead of their vehicle.
Yeah. I mean, that's a really good question. It's it's
where we cite them. Hopefully what we're doing is we're.
Starting to cite them in places.
Where people can walk out the door and use the
bike, the bikes, not drive to a place to use
the bike that feels.
Insane. That feels insane. And that's not what we envisioned.
So.
This I, the whole idea of bikeshare is first and
last mile. Transportation gaps, transportation infrastructure.
I've
I've given the example of SMCC.
It's you know, a quick trip.
From SMCC to, you know, downtown mill Creek area.
Across the bridge, just out to Portland.
Would be made so much easier, would be so much
more accessible for students for where there's clusters of people
that are living that can walk out their door.
And borrow a bike from one station and bring it
to another station. That's what we.
There's a question about, do you need insurance? No. Just
like if you own your own bike, there's no insurance
required to ride a bike. And then the last thing
was about infrastructure who pays for it. If you wanna
help a little with this, obviously the city pays for
any sort of infrastructure. We maybe want to talk a
little bit about our complete streets policy that yeah.
Absolutely does already say that when we.
Rebuild roads that we are gonna invest, or we should
invest in bike infrastructure. So that's gonna happen regardless.
Yeah, absolutely. Well, there's two points that I wanna make
so quick. Probably less than 16 minutes and 32 seconds
so quick. Okay.
The first point is, is that this is not either
or, or, or at least I don't see this as
either, or we need bikes and we need bike infrastructure.
And if we're saying we wanna support bike shops.
Shops then we're saying that we wanna support bikes in
south Portland.
Again, I just don't see this as sort of more
of a touristy thing. I see this as a transportation.
Project.
So we have the complete streets. We have a complete
streets.
Policy. And then we got grant funding a couple of
years ago to do a whole complete treat design manual.
We've done. We've created, we got another grant to do
a.
Neighborhood byway for the, to the new middle school. And
we rolled that out last year and we're gonna roll
it out as another sort of spring rollout again.
This year, so complete streets, neighborhood byways.
Byways, obviously, you know, $120,000.
Wouldn't get you very far on streets and sidewalks.
Sidewalks. It's a, both, and that we have to make
these infrastructure investments.
And now I wanna just talk about the funding part.
We submitted this project.
Hacks asked for what are the transportation priorities from, from
all of the PAC members, the city of south Portland
submitted projects.
Projects. So we submitted a project. We submitted infrastructure projects.
We submit specifically one that's in there and scored.
Scored pretty high, but not as high as a flight
share program was expanding sidewalk access on Broadway between church
and Lincoln.
Between church and Lincoln.
Widening the green belt. That's another project we submitted. So
we submitted.
All of these infras transportation infrastructure projects, and then main
D O T impacts scores of projects. And bikeshare scored
rather high on these, on, on, on the list. And
so.
I think I also mentioned, yes, this is one year.
There is the potential. I talked to somebody at GP
cog.
Cog, like I've mentioned $300,000 made it into the PAX
list. And I think if.
We did this pilot for one year and we said,
yeah, we wanna keep going with it. That we would
potentially maintain access to that money.
If you don't want to do bike share.
There isn't any other use that we can use that
a hundred, that a hundred K four. So.
So it would be, you know,
not applying the $20,000, but the a hundred thousand dollars
that sort of earmarked now for this program would just
go back to the state. It wouldn't even go to
other PACS projects or actually 300,000 that's allocated to it.
So I just want to be clear about that and
say,
I, this is not a silver bullet.
I mean it's not, but the point is, is that
it's trying to get people.
To fill in our trans our transit infrastructure that we
know is trying to do a better job of being
more frequent being, you know, more accessible to people.
Until this is another way that we thought of doing
it.
There's no doubt that we need to improve our roots.
Absolutely. But
I don't see it as an either, or I see
it as a both. And.
I might just add one small point. Is that in
looking at, excuse me first one's okay. Are you adding
because we're answering questions.
Questions? Yes. Okay. It's it's ahead the infrastructure. Thank you.
Correct. Okay. Yes.
So in looking at the experience of other cities that
have implemented bikeshare.
This is a very common perpetual issue. Do we do
infrastructure first? Do we do bikeshare first?
And what the experience shows is that they.
They really should move forward with bike share alongside. So
they're synergistic. So the more people use bikeshare the more
you have people biking, the more people who are interested
in those infrastructure investments, the better it gets for everybody.
Visibility increases.
Increases and, and you just have a more.
Sound rationale for continuing those investments. So south Portland is
not alone in thinking about their infrastructure and which should
come first.
But the experience that has been born out is that
as Julie said, it does not need to be an
either, or it should be a both. And.
There was a question too about the funding.
In future years, I think you had a slide that
said 20%.
From fees and memberships, 60 for percent from sponsorship advertising,
and then 20% would come from the community. Is that.
What Portland's model is. And, and so it, so it
wouldn't be the full hundred 20 that would fall in
the city. It would be 20% or 24 of that
annually. Is that correct?
Correct. That's the estimate we've been provided based on the
model and looking at the size of our city.
All right. And then the last question was, what about
if there's advertising that this private company puts on the
bikes that.
They don't like, do we have any way to restrict
that? I don't know as a government, if we can
restrict.
Someone's speech in that manner, but has Portland had any
examples where they've said, oh, what's this doing on a
bike? Or you, you aware of that?
Yeah. So in our experience, Portland has been an active
partner in recruiting their sponsors that have advertisements on the
bikes. You've probably seen the Harvard Pilgrim insignia on some
of their bikes in the past. So, so they did
play an active role in, you know,
identifying and, and working to secure those sponsorships.
I don't see a reason why we couldn't in, in
terms of the system design.
Say that south Portland reserves the right.
To accept.
Whatever sponsorship.
We we define. So that would be something to explore
further, but it could potentially be something we include.
In the ordinance, those are all the questions. Ma'am.
All right. Thank you very much.
Now it is the council's turn to.
Discuss and try to come up with some answers to
the questions.
Questions. So
are we counselor west. Would you like to go first?
Sure. Are you interested in pursuing a bike share program?
My answer is no. And I'll give.
I think I have about five main reasons.
Reasons this first came up about three years ago.
And at the time, because I have my own personal
experience with some of these programs, I was opposed to
it because.
I know the burden that it puts on the public
works department. I have seen what happens when you have
the bikes that are left behind the bikes that are
just abandoned. And the public works department ends up picking
'em up, taking them it's it falls on their shoulders.
And we all know that our public works. Department's sorry.
Working at capacity. I'm very proud of what they do,
but they do a lot with a lean.
Staff at the time I was on a trip in.
Seattle. And I actually took some photos of the bikes
in the.
In the, creating the hazards to the pedestrians where people
just leave 'em and all that stuff. And then I
thought this issue had gone away.
And I deleted them. So I can't entertain you tonight
with those interesting photos, but.
I that's. That was my first reason.
Then the second reason that I think we have to
really look at seriously tonight.
South Portland is just, does not have the right design
as a city for a bike share program to be
effective. It's too spread out. And an indication of that
is that this bike share these bikes, share entities, want
us to pay.
A hundred thousand dollars plus $20,000 to get us eight
stations with 40 bikes is $3,000 a bicycle.
And when you look at the cities where bike shares
are.
Successful. It's a revenue.
Generator for the city. I wrote down a couple of
the.
Ones in, in Boise, Idaho.
Under the recent agreement, they, the bike share company pays
an annual contract fee of a hundred thousand dollars.
Along with 10 cents a trip, the company also pays a
hundred, $6.
Fee for every device that needs to be moved or
removed due, due to a complaint.
Complaint in Baltimore, a permit lasts for one year and
costs 70,000.
The companies pay 10 cents ride.
Her vehicle and, and $10,000 each year in performance bonds
for damage and all that stuff. And there's also other
kinds of charges.
Charges in, in Oakland, California.
They and they pay a non-refundable permit fee of $2,500.
Plus an annual $30,000 fee, a vehicle fee of $64
per bicycle per year, and then all kinds of other
fees for the abandonment and everything else.
Where a bite and I, and I could go on
because it's universal.
Where a bike share program is supposed to work.
Where it can work. It doesn't cost the city money.
And, and for us with as tight as we are.
I would just urge us to do everything we can
to get that a hundred thousand dollars.
Reallocated for hardscape.
Hardscape. I think everybody on the council knows and you'll
hear later tonight.
Upgrading the green belt is if I could accomplish.
One thing in my years, as a counselor, it would
be that that green belt would be upgraded to multi-path
standards. I, it is so key and it would make
such a difference in our community if we could.
Then I, I am concerned about business and about conflicting
with a local business. That's made a major commitment in
our community.
And I wanna share something with you. I, during my
research,
I came across a, a really super great article to
me.
That said bikeshare should have been the biggest transformation in
inclusive, urban transport today. Except it wasn't.
Wasn't analysis of schemes over the last decade Indi exhibit
that users are disproportionately.
Young male, white, highly educated, and from higher income groups.
These are disappointing statistics to put it mildly.
Especially given the clear potential for sharing programs to expand
mobility options. For those, with barriers to owning a bike.
Instead, it has been community bike shops, which have been
transforming access to cycling for low income communities.
People of color and less represented gender identities. These are
not your traditional cycle. Retail outlets.
Outlets offering low cost and free mechanics workshops, traffic navigation
training.
Free repairs, donations of bikes, parts, and accessories.
These have engaged low income and diverse communities and cycling.
And that's the kind of thing that I do think
we can do in our community. I think we have
a bike, a bikes shop here. That's trying to do
it. It's more appropriate for what we're we have in
south Portland.
I too am very concerned about a nation national company
coming in and doing the business. When you do the
studies, the, the major ones are actually spin off some
lift and Uber and all that. And.
Then
and then again, they were just not designed for, without,
with the hardscape. So that's my.
Quick trying to have a quick rundown. I'll take too
much time of the reasons why I will not support
a bikeshare program.
Thank you, counselor west.
Anyone wanna go next, counselor, Scott, thank you. And happy
to go next. And I, I will be brief.
I don't think that this is the right time.
To have a bike share program. I would hope that
there is some point in our future.
Maybe with comprehensive plan that a bike chair might be
appropriate use in various areas of the city, but I
just don't think we're there yet. And I don't know
that it's the right money for us to spend at
this time. I've personally found it to be a disaster
in all the places that I have visited with bike
chairs. And I.
Really love the sort of Amsterdam type bike community that's
there and would love to build more of that in
south Portland, which I think is more.
About infrastructure and bike ownership. So I, I very much
appreciate the work and the thought around this. I very
much appreciate that it is sort of a big box
that is part of, you know, moving forward into.
A kind of greener and less carbon-based.
Economy and culture, but I just, I don't think it's
right for south Portland at this time and very much
appreciate.
What lighthouse bikes has, has done in our community and,
and would love to support more.
Businesses like that.
Thank you, counselor Scott, who wants to go next? Counselor
Matthews. Thank you, Julie. I got that 16 minute and
32 second remark. I'm gonna be brief briefer than
counselor Scott. I.
Am just going to say that I'm not going to
support this at this time.
I'm going to support our local business instead.
Thank you, counselor Matthews, counselor pride.
I thought about this a lot when I was reading
the memos and it was a great presentation. Thank you
so much, Julie.
And everyone on the, who worked on it.
I am.
Not in favor of this, the thing that, and, and
counselor west touched on it.
That was sort of, that, that drove me in that
direction initially was along with public comment.
Was the, the, the shape and size of our city.
You know, we're in a city hall right over here,
mill Creek area, but then there's main street and it's
way over there. And then there's the mall. I mean,
these are the places people congregate and maybe where all
the bikes end up. I don't know, but I.
I, it just doesn't feel like.
It's it's for us.
And, and maybe, maybe there's a point in the future
when we, when we do.
Widen the green belt and we do.
Create the infrastructure that, that it could possibly be something
successful, but.
I, I don't know, but I'm not the important now.
Thanks.
Thank you.
We have two more counselors left. You haven't spoken.
Oh, I will speak now. It's just financially, not the
right time for even consideration of bike. Share.
And I was an avid cyclist.
Until oh,
I, I, I sold my mountain bike shortly after I,
after a few years after I lived here, cuz it
just was really scary. I would go to.
I'd go to Portland headlight and do single trail by
God mansion.
But, and I, my dream was when I retired to
get with a basket and everything it's too scary. I
mean, even being a pedestrian, I'm a cautious.
Pedestrian in this city and it's because of the infrastructure.
So I'm, I, I know, you know, chicken and egg
kind of thing.
But I'm not a bike rider.
In this city and I have a friend who is
a bicycle messenger.
In Boston and he puts his bicycle.
In his pickup truck and goes out of the city
and rides in the country. Good for him. Yes, he
does.
All right. Thank you, counselor Walker, would you like to
speak.
Yes, I probably will be shouting to the boy since
I might be the, the lone voice to say that
I do support this.
I think that
this is a chance that.
While we're in an incredibly tight.
Fiscal situation. And I appreciate the point that counselor Matthews
made before about how.
It is, it is probably more dire than a lot
of people realize in terms of where we are financially.
I feel like this is a.
A rare opportunity. We have to be aspirational.
With little cost to our taxpayers.
Taxpayers. I think that a $20,000 investment.
To do something for a one year pilot that could
have a major difference.
In access to our city is huge. And I appreciate
all of the work that.
The sustainability department did on this. I do hear the
concerns that my fellow counselors hear.
I, I don't see this. I thought Julie said it
perfectly when she said it was a both. And I
don't see this as a weaponization against our small business.
I see this as.
A symbiotic opportunity where it might get more people on
bikes, therefore getting more people to realize they want to
purchase bikes and go to our small businesses to do
so.
And often, you know, my, one of my questions I
was gonna have, if we did move forward with this
was.
Whether we could put some sort of stipulation where we
did use our small business.
To provide the ongoing maintenance, therefore creating financial opportunity for
that business as well. But that is a moot point.
So I do think this is a responsible way to
go about something that is.
In meeting both our council goal, one of our council
goals and also our one climate future goals. But I
will respect the will of the council.
Thank you, counselor Walker.
It does seem that we are, that the council is
saying no.
I will just say that I.
I love biking and yes, it can be challenging to
ride.
In south Portland, the green belt is.
Spectacular place to ride, even if it isn't that wide.
But the re when you ride in traffic, you must
kind of learn how, and that's what happens in south
Portland.
I just, I guess what I'm.
I'm I don't know. I think I'm more team Walker
than I, than I am with the others, because I
do wish we could try some experiments like this. I
don't think that.
Anyone I
with all due respect. I don't think that the private
business would be harmed. I do think it could be
more symbiotic.
It doesn't look like counsel is going to say that
I just wanted to, for the record.
I counselor.
Which makes it 52 a month per bike. So I,
yeah, it's all public money. It's all public dollars. I
think we have to.
Say we cannot. It comes from the taxpayers, whether it's
our particular or whatever, if we could get that a
hundred thousand dollars.
And use it to do some little bit of the
green bag. That would be yes, we would, because we're
not gonna be Amsterdam or Copenhagen anytime soon, and that's
gonna be a cost of millions of dollars.
I think we've come to the end of the work
shop. Yes.
We've answered the questions and I think we're moving on.
I can see what time it is. It's 9 35.
We wanna do e-bikes up, but if anyone feels like
they just wanna stand up, please don't rush out of
the room.
I need to stand up. This is me standing, stretching
just a little bit.
We can make e-bikes fast. Mm-hmm yes, I think
it will be all right. Fast. Nothing.
Oh, I love well, if you have ideas for changing
that, I would certainly love to hear them. I'll call
me, tell you later. It's like a new thing forme.
Yeah, and I like him with a wide grape. Not
very appreciated. All right. Can we get going with our
e-bikes discussion?
Who's leading us off.
So
so tonight counsel's being asked, it's kind of a combined.
Workshop topic on e-bikes on the green bell and bikes
on sidewalks. So the ultimate question.
Two counselors will be whether or not to allow e-bikes
on the green bell. And it's a little bit more
nuanced than that. But then two.
Whether or not to allow bicycles on city sidewalks. And
so tonight for the e-bikes portion of this, you're gonna
hear from the chair of the bike head committee.
As they were the ones that initiated this workshop request
that you all accepted to add to the agenda.
So you'll hear from Rosemary, Daniel A. Little bit about the rationale
for why.
This was added. And then you'll also hear from.
Some folks on from our park staff to talk a
little bit about some of the surveying they've done and
some of the observations they've done.
In the past related to this topic. So I've got
a few things to say, but I'm gonna turn it
over first to Rosemarie. Thank you. Rosemarie chair of pike,
PED. And I want to say.
That there are three committee members who are here. Jeff
Woodbury who's over here. Counselors, Carl epic.
And Sam Merrill, all three members of the bicycle pedestrian
committee.
And I, I believe at least one of them is
gonna have a couple things to say when I'm finished.
But I wanna thank the council first for holding this
workshop tonight. And I will be brief. I have no
fancy slides.
With regards to this topic, but I'm hopeful that.
Your discussion and debate will resolve most of the issues.
And I'm also happy to answer any questions.
Questions. The south Portland bicycle pedestrian committee took a position
to support the use of electric bikes, ranked one and
two to be allowed on the green belt.
Multi-use path and our recommendation is supported by the following
reasons.
Reasons first and foremost.
MOS. We see the increased use of e-bikes as a
positive thing, for reasons that include.
Allowing greater access, increasing, maintaining, and physical activity.
Decrease in auto emissions.
Emissions greater sociability and supporting physical activity for aging populations
to name, but a few.
The state, the second is.
The state definition, referring to all bicycles as devices.
Devices supports the use of e-bikes and encourages communities to
do the same.
Third e-bikes are allowed on Portland, Scarborough and Cape Elizabeth
multi-use paths.
Paths, and to my knowledge, all other sections of the
Eastern trail.
To prohibit them here is to expect the folks.
Will ride through Portland, get off their bike and walk
through south Portland and get back on when they reach
Scarborough.
To not do that would mean breaking the law. The
former is unlikely and the latter is not known.
To most e-bike owners.
For one of the missions of the bicycle pedestrian committee
is to support.
And encourage and teach.
Responsible use of bicycles as well as.
Providing education for pedestrians.
Pedestrians on August 16th, this past year, the bicycle pedestrian committee
conducted its first.
Green belt education day lasting about five hours.
And during that time we encountered many e-bike riders on
the green bell.
All we're using their bikes responsibly.
And none were aware that they were not allowed
fifth. We've had two opportunities to demonstrate.
Safe use of e-bikes on our green belt yet. We've
been unable to do that. Given the president interpretation of
our ordinance.
So we've been prohibited from helping.
To educate and teach people.
Better ways to, and ways to be responsible bike riders
and bike owners.
Because we, we can't promote the use of e-bikes on
our green belt.
Bell six, the police department has been clear that it
really cannot enforce the ordinance for a variety of reasons,
including.
The lack of needed staff to do this. I mean,
you would need to have.
Police officers on bicycles going up and down the green
belt.
Bell being able to identify e-bikes one and two.
Or three or any e-bikes and be able to identify
that the bike is actually not in.
Or is he in electric use mode? Because if it's
not an electric use mode, then it's not a violation.
And
anyway, so
so given that it makes no sense to have an
ordinance that cannot be enforced.
Enforced. So I, we hope that this council will adjust
the ordinance and allow e-bikes one and two on the
green belt.
This committee is prepared to help in any way considered
appropriate.
Standing by for your direction.
I'm prepared to an answer. Any questions as well.
And I have things to say about bikes on the
sidewalk, but I will wait until we talk about e-bikes
here.
And I don't know if Carl or Jeff or Sam
have anything they wanna add.
Before before. Okay, come on up.
So, so this is Sam Merrill on the bike.
Pit Sam Merrill bike pet committee. I live on Sawyer
street.
Being on wheels. A lot of the time.
And that that's some of the things I.
Contribute to the committee is I, I get my, my
exercise in a hand cycle.
And I'll go out about an hour, an hour and
a half have for.
Since, I don't know, 20 years.
And I used a, a hand cycle with no pedal
assist.
For until 2022.
And once I got pedal assist, I'll tell you the
world opened up. quite a lot. It's flattens Hills.
I could go farther in the same hour and a
half of exercise.
I can go.
With it, with the moderate at speed.
Tolerable I'm standard green belt traffic.
All the way to rain, right. And back.
Just under two hours.
So that's that changed my life. Being able to do
that as a disabled person. So.
I would say, if I, if we don't do this,
then I can't do that.
Thanks.
Thank you, Sam. Thank you, Carl or Jeff? Jeff, come
on out.
This was really an impromptu preparation here for this. All
right. Jeff Woodbury Hobart street.
I'm in favor of allowing all e-bikes on the green
belt class one, two, and three.
For a number of reasons, the logic of stopping it.
If you're not aware of class one and two max
sat at 20 miles an hour, class three can go
to 28 miles an hour.
Now the logic of keeping a class three off the
green belt is the same logic.
How do you play that into my vehicle?
Which I'm limited to 35 miles an hour on the
road, but my car can go 120.
As Rosemary said
if my bike's not turned on, it's a regular bike.
You cannot enforce that. Don't make law. You cannot.
Enforce. If you're worried about speed, irregular bicyclist goes about
15 miles an hour.
If you've been on the green belt, the fastest people
on bikes are people wearing spandex and tow clips? Yeah.
On a regular bike.
They're the ones that frighten me.
If you worried about weight.
My bicycle and I weigh 220 pounds.
If I got an, a tandem bike with my girlfriend.
That would be 330 pounds.
Fitness writer the most important.
Reason is because of the infrastructure of south Portland.
I got my girlfriend an e-bike because she loves to
bike. She is terrified of Broadway.
As soon as she can get to the green bell.
She loves it. I've seen more older folks on e-bikes
than anywhere.
And speaking of the sidewalk.
If you've ever been to cash corner, everybody pulls to
their right to let the people turn left. And there
I'm either waiting behind 20 cars or I'm on the
sidewalk. So guess where I am, I'm on the sidewalk.
I really don't see any good reason to ban e-bikes.
And if you tell me the green, belt's not wide
enough, you know what? We can be careful.
We are careful. We have our squeaky horns, our bells,
we slow down when people are there when kids are
there, strollers are there other people are there.
We can do that, just like we do on the
road.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Oops. So thank you. And I'm going to introduce Sydney
Raftery to come up and speak about.
Sydney is presented to the.
Bicycle pedestrian committee a couple of times. And.
Has done some surveys that I think are helpful.
And insightful, and I'm gonna turn it over to her.
Thank you. Hello counsel. My name is Sydnee rafter. I'm
the park ranger for the city.
This is just a recap of some of the surveys
that we have done and that I have presented to
some of you.
In the past and presented to bike pet committee.
In 2022, we started these surveys. We only got to
do them in October of that year, based on when
we were asked and then in.
2023, we spent 60 hours collecting data.
Between June and September.
Twenty twenty four, a hundred four hours.
On the green belt collecting data.
I can tell you more about our methods if you
want, but I'm gonna skip that part unless you have
questions.
Questions to get to the points. So looking at those
two years that we were able to collect data for
the whole season. Here are some of our findings.
Findings of the 5,015 users that we counted over those
two years.
43% were using pedal bikes and.
7% were using e-bikes.
E-bikes the average speed of the pedal bikes was 9.25
miles per hour. And e-bikes was 10.15.
So within one mile, an hour of each other.
The percentage of e-bikes going at an excessive.
Excessive speed, which I chose 15 miles an hour, cuz
that's what looked fast to me. .
Was more than the percentage of pedal bikes going over
15 miles per hour.
But that being said with how many of each there
were.
The instances of pedal bikes was a lot more with
44 pedal bikes and only 20. E-bikes going over 15
miles an hour.
All bikes, electric and pedal tend to slow down when
there are more people present or when the path is
narrower.
Just makes sense. And then all bikes do need to
work on signaling. Although we do find that people.
Signal. If someone is blocking their way.
So that in addition to the fact that the parks
department only receives about one complaint per year,
about e-bikes leads us to support this proposition.
Thank you. Thank you.
I wanted to say just a couple other things.
And that's that, to our knowledge, there has not been
any, there have not been any reports of.
Accidents that have been caused.
Caused with, or by e-bikes.
Over the past couple years. I, secondly, I wanted to
acknowledge Sam Merrill's contribution.
Tonight and that, that his.
Insight and his own perspective and experience.
Has really lended itself to giving the bicycle pedestrian committee.
A broader view and a better understanding of.
What are the populations who are the people.
We're trying to encourage to be out and getting.
Exercise and that's everyone. And.
Sam helps us to keep that in mind at all
times. So I'm happy to answer any questions if anybody
has any.
Okay, so that's the end of the information. All right.
I do that. Have you have information as well? Yep.
So I just, because I know at least three of
the counselors weren't here and some members of the public,
the last time this is discussed. So I just briefly
wanted to remind folks, but on the April 8th, 18th, the
city council staff did bring forward an ordinance proposal that
would've explicit.
Explicitly allowed e-bikes on the green belt and the council
did pass the first read.
When it got to second reads concerns were raised about
the width of the green bell not being to ASTO
standards. And so the council.
Withdrew that item from the agenda.
With the intent of taking it up after such a
time, the city could find out a little bit more
about how we could widen the green belt and how
much that would cost. And so.
Since that time we have done an in-house assessment of
the green bell to talk about.
Areas where it might not meet proper lengths.
Lengths and, and things of that nature.
The next step after we've completed this first step is
to.
Secure funding for an inspection of Antoine bridge and to
begin preliminary design work, that's gonna cost about $200,000.
With the funding for the entire project right now, including
construction is estimated to be at about 6.5 million. So we
are looking at grants, have applied for grants. We'll continue
to, but that's where we stand on that.
Obviously bike PED in October, as, as chair DeAngelis had
indicated.
Asked you all to bring this up.
Despite the work not being done on, on the green
belt council said, okay.
The solution this time.
As opposed to the last time where the language was,
we explicitly allow e-bikes.
E-bikes is to mirror the state law definition. Right. And
so that's what you'll see in the proposed ordinance amendments
is that.
The, the proposal would be to have our ordinance simply.
Refer to state law when talking about bicycles and essentially.
That includes e-bikes and, and state law does say class
one and two.
State law prohibits class three.
On trail. So it's, it's.
It's and this, if you wanna mirror state law, it's
class one and two only.
Practical as that may not be, but, but that's how
state law reads.
Reads. And so again,
the staff continue to support this update and.
I, we probably just want to stop here and talk
about e-bikes on green belt versus sidewalks at this point.
I'm assuming that seemed to be how our workshop presenters
have.
Planned. Okay.
So counselors, thank you very much, Scott.
Counselors. Do you have questions of our presenters or.
Questions of Scott, counselor, Scott. I have two, hopefully quick
questions.
Questions. Thank you very much. If we were to.
Mirror the state and apologies if this is in here
somewhere. If we were to mirror the state law and
not include class three or sorry, if we were to
include class three in our allowance of e-bikes on the
green belt, does that prevent us or.
Put us in jeopardy of any sort of.
State funding or other grant opportunities for widening the Greenbelt.
Not that I'm aware of. I couldn't say that for
a fact, but I don't, I don't know if this,
I haven't seen anything that where the state has precluded.
I don't know if anyone has more expertise than me
on the matter.
Certain otherwise, but
Carla pick again, fine street. I, I don't know the
answer to that question.
But it would might be worth.
Passing something that's consistent with state law.
And or doing the research to find out prior.
I wouldn't let that slow you down, you know, but
that's basical what I'm saying.
Conversation. And then the other question, I just wanna confirm.
The question before us is not.
Or allowing e-bikes on the green belt is not dependent
on.
This widening project, this, we can do that. And then
the widening project is a totally separate consideration. Just wanna
confirm that mm-hmm you don't have to the, the
prior council's guidance was, we should widen it first before
we.
Before we take any sort of action.
But you do not have to. Yeah. There's there's no
like legal liability.
No, no, no. Okay, good. I'm good. Let's go.
I guess
I have a, well, do you guys have questions?
Questions questions. I have clarification. I, yes. So why, but
go with yours. You're pretty involved with this.
The state law.
Allows class one and class two.
Bicycles. If you allow bicycles.
Bicycles. It got really mixed up before.
And what we've tried to do now is have these
sections.
Sections mirror the provisions of state law.
So the way it works is.
If you ride a, if you want a bicycle, it
can be a bicycle pedal bicycle. It can be a
class, one bicycle. It can be a class, two bicycle.
Class three bicycles are electric. Bikes are not, are, are
restricted unless you expressly allow them.
Okay, thank you.
Okay. Any other questions? I got one for Scott, Scott.
Doesn't Portland pipeline have any say in any of the
waiting we do on the green boat considering they're the
owners of the green belt.
For, for portions that we lease, they're not just from
the pipeline, but we also lease it from.
There's a portion we leased from another location. So that
would be part of it we'd have to. So I
know, but what I'm saying is we're making it sound
like we can just go ahead and widen the green
belt. Yep. We have a lot of loops and stipulations
to go through the, be able to do that. Yep.
We do. We have to get permission and think, and,
and even, even on portions, we own, if we're gonna
encroach on.
People's properties. We'd have to get that, you know, that's
why it's not a really straightforward project.
Okay. Any other council questions before we go to public
comment? I do not see any public comment is open
on this item.
We have no public comment on this item.
Public comment.
Is about to close, but I will give you time
to approach that podium. Pardon?
I thank you. Go ahead. Oh, okay. Yeah. Phil Weinberg
parrot street.
To me.
Class two class three.
It doesn't matter. I have a class, two bike.
Mike and cuz class three is two too fast for
me and nobody's going to ride a class.
28 miles an hour on the green belt.
That that isn't going to happen. So to me, it
doesn't really matter.
If, if it's more convenient to go with the.
State regulations. That's fine. I think.
Either way. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Anyone else on this topic?
Charlie teamy
teamy pleasant, Dale.
I was just wondering if there's any.
Liability questions in this.
You know, people break the law all the time.
Or I do anyways. .
And, and I think
you know, there's counselors that have seen me actually writing.
My bike on the sidewalk.
But
you know, if
is the city re
res ultimately responsible if it'll, if that it's has to
have.
Infrastructure to support these speeds.
Speeds on these paths.
Paths. So if you allow it, does that mean you're
responsible for it? And if you disallow it and something
happens.
Are you off the hook? I I'm just curious. Thank
you. Thank you. Do we have a.
Come on down.
One last comment, Jeff Woodbury again.
He makes a good point. The gentleman behind me.
Have you seen the condition of our green belt?
Trying to drive 28 miles an hour on that is
insane. so if you widen it and make it
nice and smooth, you're encouraging more dangerous riding than just
leaving it alone and allowing all the bikes. Thank you.
Okay. I'll be remember you the next time I bounce
over those route. .
Anyone else? Public comment.
All right. Public comment on this item is closed. And
Scott, I think we have some questions.
Questions. So like the question only question I had heard
was about liability.
And so no. If the state, if the city adopts
the state's definition, there's no added liability that that comes
from that.
Actually I realize that. Thank you very much, Scott. Thank
you. I realize I'm closing public comment.
But the item also includes bikes on sidewalks. So we
haven't discussed that yet. So I think.
That, that we it's not officially closed.
Sorry about that folks, but we'll open it back up
when we get to that.
Anyway, now counselors.
I think you could either discuss this now, or we
could hear the presentation about bicycles on city sidewalk.
Cy counselor Walker. I think we should finish this.
And then we can just move forward cleanly. Okay. Can
we hear your information about.
BI. Well, wait a minute. Oh, this is sorry. I
thought you meant this as the whole topic. No. All
right. Well, counselor Walker, would you like to say something
about this? Absolutely.
As an avid pedal, biker myself and someone who is
on the green bell often in those five lovely months
that we have to ride.
I'm not brave enough to ride in the winter, but.
I see people on e-bikes all of the time. And
I think it only makes sense to.
In the spirit of encouraging access and getting more people
on bikes.
Bikes and stretching the ability of people to bike longer
and further.
In in with increased stability.
We should narrow the state law.
And allow class one and class two on the green
belt.
Thank you very much, counselor Scott.
I'm definitely in favor of allowing e-bikes on the green
belt. And I think I don't.
Don't see an enforcement.
Or an enforcement option or a sort of clear distinction
of not allowing.
Class three as a distinct e-bike type, then class two.
I wanted to clarify Scott, when you said we don't
have any liability, I think you said as long as
we follow.
Sort of the state definitions? No, I don't think, but
you didn't mean even if we allowed versus three, if
you, if you allowed class three, there's not, you know,
the city's not liable for okay. If, if a green
belt's not 10 feet wide, that's just an ASTO standard.
It's not a state law requirement. Okay. I would be
in favor of allowing sort of.
Type 1, 2, 3, e-bikes on the green belt.
Okay, thank you. I'm seeing it this side. Well, are
you had one more question or a comment? I just
commend my thing to say that I would support that
as well.
So you are 1, 2, 3 people. Alright, counselor complexity. The way
we had worked it out was to.
We don't specify the green belt in here. We just
say.
It'll have to these, these ordinances that are ready to
go really.
Are the bicyclists defined this way.
Then it's that
you know, bicycles.
Bicycles can go on all parks.
Parks. It's kind of gonna have to go back to
the drawing board a little bit. If you wanna separate
out the green belt and say that class three is
allowed on the green belt.
Because if you look at.
It's 18. If you wanna look at it, it's 18
eight.
No person shall operate any blah, blah, blah.
In class three bicycle on any.
City
park and
so it's just, if you, and it's fine, if that's
what people wanna do, let's just.
Give directions to the corporation council.
That he needs to make some changes.
Changes so that it expressly says.
Class three e-bike on the Greenville.
Is this also coming back as an order coordinates ordinance.
Okay. Three, three different.
Chapters need to be amended for 15 and 18.
Okay.
Anyone else on this side, have comments.
Yes, counselor pride. I'm in favor of.
Matching with state law.
So you're a one and two. I am.
All right, counselor Matthews. You think you're, I'll go with
the state two, one and two, because this doesn't really
matter. Anyway, we can't enforce it. There's not gonna be
any police officers down there. We don't have the force
to send Roco down there, walking the Greenville, give it
uptick. So.
So it is what it is.
So you're bringing the voice of a cold dose of
reality. Are ya? Yep. Okay.
Thank you, counselor Scott. Sorry. Can I just clarify? You're
saying you wanna go with one and two only?
But you don't feel that you can enforce.
Not allowing three. So it seems, oh, what is the
three? The ones that go 150 yeah, yeah. 150.
Yeah. It'll make a big mess when they hit somebody.
So sure.
I I'm not a fan of it anyway. I'm not,
I, I was probably the only one that opposed bikes
and everything on the green belt.
But the more I think about it, we can't.
Can't separate disabled people from.
That law. And we can't separate people that may be
in rehabilitation, riding bikes and stuff like that. So I
kind of had to change my thought process. So, you
know, I mean, there are a lot of people. I,
I feel my fear is you have a lot of
people down the, there walking with two or three dogs.
At a time or two dogs at a time and
you have a bike coming at 30 miles an hour.
And that's just a catastrophe waiting to happen.
And at what point, because we allow it, are we
held liable for lawsuits?
Lawsuits and everything else on the green belt. And I
guess that's a question for the city manager.
Or a good lawyer. So I don't, I don't know.
So, but I'll, or I'll go ahead and support one,
two and three then.
So you doesn't really matter. I mean, I think you
were gonna restrict the number of dogs, but.
Don't bring that up. Clancy. Did you get the.
Anyway. I did not say I was in favor of
such a thing, but all right. So.
All three of you are going with one, two and
three, which is.
State plus
a counselor west. Okay. I guess I, is it is
everybody else weighed in oh, I don't know. I'm
still, I'm still listening to everybody documents. I would just
stick with one and two because it's all done. Ready
to go. And we spent so much time on this.
I mean, if they come on the agenda to be
adopted next time for such reading I don't is, does
not. Does disallowing class three affect a large population?
You are class three first, just you.
around here. You dunno podium? Yeah. I wouldn't know.
People on TV are watching have to come to the
podium to answer questions. Yeah. And reintroduce yourself.
I know who he is. I bought my class too.
It was upgradable to class three.
So now I have a class three. If I turn
it off, it's a class, nothing. I know. It's I
bought my class, my other class two, which I took
to Vermont and park there.
And I bought a kit from Europe and I took
off the speed governor completely, so I can buy his
pass as I can.
So that's no class chief Gillman. We're a helmet in
a monster star, class four.
And in all those cities that I've used ride share,
I have never worn a helmet.
Nobody does. Ooh, six.
Yes. Well,
okay.
Hear that
so we have counselor west.
Advocating for one and two, let's be aligned with the
state. We have other saying, well, maybe we should go
with three.
Counselor Coleman. I just king Solomon it's needed here. One
and two.
It's a state zero one and two state. See other
tiebreaker cuz Misha was also one and two Misha was
one and two. I am well.
Basically, I wonder how long it'll be before the state
actually has to say, look at e-bike technology. Look what
people are riding and they make a change.
But at this point, I think we should stick with
the state.
And I would recommend that the lobby changed.
At the state level.
Okay. Separate from us.
All right. So it sounds as if Scott in answer
too, the question, whether or not to allow e-bikes on
the green belt in keeping.
With state's current policies is what.
We're going to see as in ordinance form.
Yes, that is correct. Can we now talk about.
Bikes on sidewalks. Mm-hmm we sure can. So,
this was not, this was.
Hold on one second. Here, we bring this up. Here
we go.
So this was another
request from the bike PED committee that you actually already
had a workshop on in September 9th. Yep.
And at the time you weren't ready to provide guidance,
but you asked for the matter to be taken up
again.
Prior to the summer of 20, 26. So there's a few
things that I want to add, but I know the
bike pad chair wants to speak. This topic is well
bike, PED chair, please proceed. So Rosemary de bike committee,
very little to.
Add to what we said.
About the, about e-bikes on the multi-use path.
But I would just say that we support bikes on
sidewalks, primarily for safety reasons.
Reasons that's the biggest factor.
That drives us in
what's happening with bikes and needing to be on sidewalks.
Sidewalks. No most people will not ride on a sidewalk
unless it's necessary.
And so it's in, in sections of the city. One
section that we discussed at the last.
Council meeting was the section between Amato's and the AutoZone.
At the bottom of Browns hill.
And that that section
would there's no place to ride on the street. So
people would.
Just automatically get up on the sidewalk.
But in instances where there's.
There's a bike path or where people feel safe. They're
going to.
Typically ride O not ride on the sidewalk.
So, this is really areas where, where infrastructure.
Or lack thereof, necessitates sidewalk use.
We talked about it and I, I know what the
ordinance says now, but.
Just in clarifying, you know, children, especially those trying to
get.
To school definitely need safety. And many of them are.
Now riding with their parents. And so we don't wanna
put kids up on the sidewalk.
And require parents to be riding down in the street.
So as our infrastructure improves, there's less need, but right
now,
we believe the need is.
High and I will go to.
City manager for additional comments. Thank you. Thank you.
So I'm not gonna run through kind of the pros
and cons. I think you've all been able to read
that and can, and can discern those on your own.
Just remind just a couple highlights.
That, when this was discussed previously, the public direct per
public works director noted numerous other communities already allow.
Bicyclists on sidewalks and that according to M D O
T data that they receive, they're not appear to be
any increase in accidents with pedestrians in those communities that
they were able to suss out.
And while this isn't something that staff is coming here
to, to recommend this isn't something that w w we
also oppose.
Oppose, however, it should be noted that.
Our public works are director did request that if this
is something council is interested in.
That her preference would be for.
This to not include e-bikes and.
To have the use of all bikes restricted.
In areas where there's heavy, where there's out outdoor dining
allowed because.
There's there's a, there's a narrowing of the sidewalk there,
and that would com have bikes competing with pedestrians and,
and others. And so she pointed to Sacco as an
example of where bikes are allowed on streets, but prohibited
in, in certain districts. So that, that was her recommendation.
And chief for her is here. If you have any
questions, as, as I think he noted last time, there's
really no proactive enforcement of this, just like the e-bike
issue. So even if you pass this in a, or
even if you don't pass this, it is PR practically
hard to in enforce and not something we're really proactively.
Looking at
okay. Usually I don't ask the question first, but my
quick question is, does Saco do that by ordinance? Do
you know? Yes. Yes they do. Yep. Oh, so it
can be done. Thank you.
Counselors. Do you have questions?
Questions counselor west, the soccer differentiate between e-bikes and regular
bikes on their sidewalk. That I'll have to look up
real quick. I'm not sure. I, I don't, I'm not
sure that you can do it.
Well, I think you can do it. I think your,
your question probably is more about the practicality, right? Is
how is police go? Gonna know.
If, if he changed the definition, you'd have to carve
out an, an exception, obviously.
Well, because state law says the bike is a bike.
Yep. And you.
I guess we'd have to talk to the corporate, his
comp corporation council about it.
Because if the bike is a bike, SAS is just
bikes in general, not just the bikes. It's bikes, an
e-bike is a bike it's it's bikes in general. And
if you can have a bike on a sidewalk, you
can probably have a class one in class two.
Yeah, their restriction was just all bikes in the areas
where there's.
Where there's those outdoor dining?
Any other council questions? I, I just wanted to add
to something that city manager said again, Rosemary, DeAngelos just.
The our, our
perception is that if, if, if there was an outside
dining, you know, bikes are just going to naturally get
off the sidewalk. I mean, I think it's fine prohibiting
them, what, whatever you wanna do, but it's not likes
somebody on a bike bicycle is gonna insist on driving.
Through tables and chairs, you know, like I'm allowed on
the, you know, I mean, it just, it's just not
a reasonable thing. So.
People on bikes tend to be.
Responsible cyclists. And they're not really trying to do something
that's going to.
Cause damage or difficulty or challenge.
But, but they're looking for safety.
And so we have some, we have some on sidewalk
dining down in the Nightvale area, you know, it's fine
if you wanted to say that region, but I think
that just, I think some time we have, have to
just understand that.
People are just gonna be responsible and do the right
thing. And we don't have to regulate everything.
That's a thank you. Okay.
Any other counselor Coleman. I remember during the discussion.
We was thinking of not having.
Cyclists on the sidewalk.
On ocean street.
You know, from where it, where Barbara brothers and all
of those stores mm-hmm are because of coming out of
a store mm-hmm . And I can tell you because
of the condos that are by see.
And this was
my age, but mm-hmm, double.
On the sidewalk and we all, and didn't even use
a bell that they were coming.
right. So you have, so it sounds like I
didn't expect to see, because we were kind of like
window gazing.
At one of the stores and then, but not single.
File. No, no two Abras. Well,
did did we open this up for public comment? We
had not yet. We're on counselor questions. Yeah. And so,
so am I, am I forgetting that, that we thought
that a certain areas of commerce and like outdoor dining
that if I could just, if you, yeah, it's sounds
a you're question would be.
Whether it makes sense to look at certain.
Areas to offer restrictions. That was a discussion last time
and it wasn't decided. All right. Thank you. Any other
counselor questions?
Questions public comment is open on this item. Any public
comment on this item? Oh, you are so brave, sir.
Running quick. Thank you. Quick one.
I don't dare ride. Okay. You, you are still Phil
Weinberg, right? That's right. Yeah. thank you. Yeah. 80
years old.
that's right. Got every I'm put that in
my notes. All right, let the man speak. Okay. I
don't dare ride.
On Broadway between the bridge.
And cottage it's way too dangerous.
And also all around the mall.
Those are the two areas that.
Yeah, I wouldn't want to go if I couldn't ride
on the sidewalk. Thank you.
Yes between the bridge and cottage I've been on that
sidewalk. All right.
Anyone else super quick, Jeff Woodbury, again, I'd like to
reiterate his point.
Because my girlfriend is terrified of Broadway. And when we
go from.
Broadway gardens. All she wants to do is get to
the green belt as quickly and safely as possible, which
means she's gonna be riding the sidewalk almost all the
way mm-hmm yeah, very carefully. But yeah, Broadway's terrifying to
her. And a lot of people.
If you locked them out of the sidewalk, you blocked
him out of getting on the green bell. Yep. Mm-hmm
.
Okay.
Any more public comment on this one? I don't see
any it's closed.
Counsel, how do we want to address whether or not
to allow bicycles on city sidewalks, counselor Walker? I have
a propose that we allow bicycles all bicycles on the
sidewalk, except for the districts of Nightvale and mill Creek.
So entire districts.
District's night fill and mill Creek. Okay.
That is a proposal. It's not a formal one it's
information for our city manager.
Anyone else?
I think again, it's one of those subjects. It just
doesn't matter. I've never seen anybody get a ticket.
On a sidewalk mm-hmm with a bicycle before, so
it really doesn't matter. I don't support it, but go
ahead and ride on 'em. Nobody's gonna stop you. So
to be clear, you do not support no allowing bicycles
on no, I've seen too many people get like, like,
and.
And to justice point, she's saying all those businesses down
there, which is a good idea, but like you come
out of the Petros market, you're coming out of a,
out of a, oh God, Inco.
And you start to walk out and there's a bike
flying by you.
Any of those little shops up there. So if we're
gonna include those ones, let's include that business district up
there.
Or any other small business district, like, you know, tho
heat has that little strip there of, you know, you
come out chickpea, you're gonna get nailed, but is it
chickpea? Yeah. Mr. Chickpeas, you know, places like that. So.
People are trying to run businesses. And when people are
walking out with sandwiches or sodas and stuff like that,
and you have.
And I know that Rosemary is trying to say that
bike is a responsible yes. A lot of, ah, but
there are a lot of Karens out there too.
So I, I just have a, I have a problem
with this bicycle. Okay.
Right. Other counselors, we need to give the city some
type of guidance so far we have, okay. Counselor, Scott.
I have to say, I'm terrified of the idea of
allowing bicycles on sidewalks and have been in many situations
where.
It's been a, as a pedestrian, scary to have bicycles.
So I'm kind of more in favor of not allowing
bicycles on sidewalks. I do appreciate that there are some
areas of the city, like cash corner that have major.
Transportation.
Issues. And I, I would be more in favor of.
Having signage and certain kind of byways of the city
where we had a sign that says bicycles are allowed
on side on this sidewalk.
Between X, Y, Z, and allow.
That, but I, I just think there's so many areas
of the city. I know it's not very enforceable, but
I just don't think it's a great sort of principle
to have. So.
When you were full of tricks over there? no,
I mean, your idea. Oh.
Counselor in pride. We'll let him go first. This time.
Sure. It's funny. Cause I think I.
Suggested something like that last time this came up and
I, and I agree.
With counselor Matthews, but I go the other way, if
we're not gonna force an ordinance.
Why have it, but I also think the signage is
good for more than one reason. Not only because, you
know, you can, you can tell people that this is
the place where it's appropriate, but you're also warning walkers
that this is a place where bikers are more likely
to be on, on the sidewalk. So I appreciate the
signage idea.
I think that, you know, if it were something that.
We could possibly enforce sure. Keep it out of night,
bill. Keep it out of.
The milk Creek area, but I mean, as, as counselor
Matthews pointed out, there's, you know,
yeah, a lot of other places where we kind of
have to do the same thing.
You know, I, I guess.
I guess I'm all over the map on this one,
but for the most part I'm, I'm, I'm really like.
You know, let's let the kids ride on the, on
the sidewalk and maybe increase the age. I don't know,
but I'm just worried about the kids.
Really more than anything else, kids on side.
You know, I know that currently, I think if you're
under 14 or 14 and under, you can ride on
the sidewalk, so we're already letting.
Kids ride on the sidewalks.
Sidewalks, you know, if they're gonna be with their families,
if they're gonna be.
You know, if they're 15 riding to the high school.
Through cash corner.
I, I think they should be able to ride on
the sidewalk.
So I, I think
I'm I where I really landed. Yeah. I think Simon
is great if that's where the council goes with this
having areas where it's cooled that you can do it
and there's signage. Great. But.
If there's enough support, I'm fine with it. Just being
allowed.
Well, Madam. Okay. Thanks for that. Well, that was a
curve. I thought you were going Illinois. Okay. I know.
I make, I'm trying to keep track of things here
and you threw me a curve ball. Okay. Can counsel
Walker? I I'd like to retract my.
Night bill. And where did I say mill Creek? Oh,
what? Well, the only reason I suggested it was because
of going off of our workshop before I thought that
was the only way we had had a, had a
chance to pass. But I mean, I believe much to
the bike head can committees point that we should be
able a cycle cyclist should be a allowed to ride
on the side.
Sidewalk wherever. And whenever safety is a concern mm-hmm ,
and that is my, that is my end goal. And
so I offered mill Creek and nightfall as a way
to get around the concerns that council had raised. The
last time we discussed this, but if that is not
a deterrent or that is not an, and not an
advantage to.
To taking this up. Then I retract that because I,
I whole.
Wholeheartedly fullheartedly
as a writer, myself who does also read on the
sidewalk.
Looking at the police chief.
Where I feel like I have to, I, I, I
feel everybody, not just children should be able to ride
on the sidewalk in cash corner without getting smooshed.
Okay. Can I just say I'm totally malleable here? Like
it's like, I mean, that's what I'd prefer. No, but
like I, no, you cannot say can. Okay, fine. I
won't sit. Have to interpret all this. I retract. I
retract my malleability. Well, alright. Count.
Counselor west I've lo starting to lose track of whether
you've expressed an opinion. No, cuz I, I just I'm
malleable too, but I was thinking just to try to
get something done. What if we said, we'd just leave
it the way it is, but we express these say
we're not gonna enforce it.
I mean, we have, I don't think we're you don't
wanna do that. I, well, I don't think the council
can literally say.
Go ahead. Break that law. What if we just repeal
the whole ordinance and we're silent.
What if we just do nothing, supposed to be
nothing place. That's not against the law.
If, yeah, it's not against the law, right. We just
repeal the ordinance.
It's probably the wisest thing to do.
If you, the trouble is, if we try signs, there's
a lot of signs we're gonna be coming in. And
I like that part. I like that part. Yeah. Yeah.
So in repealing an ordinance that currently says it's illegal
to rise on this side sidewalk, you are in favor
of making it legal. Yes.
I'm just kind of want to go along with the
majority, whatever you think I'll do it. Okay. Can we
just.
Repeal the ordinance mm-hmm .
What's it. Yeah. But if we.
we're already Cotter and I are already all voted.
So, I mean, it's.
It's I, how, who, no, one's voted from what I
can tell. Can't figure out what to do. We're all,
I'm the only one that's very clear for it. I
think everyone else is like, I look Misha was pretty
clear. I I'm I'm for it. Like if, if there's
enough support for four. Okay. I'm for getting rid of.
But if there's not, and we need to find another
middle ground I'm okay. With car's ID and signs before
started hitting my own. We have an awful lot sidewalks
with utility poles. Yeah. Just remember that that's a great
deterrent. What's 32 is the repeal, the ordinance.
Something that we can offer. That makes any sense.
I, I would assume so, because then you're not expressly.
Prohibiting it, I just don't know what the default is.
If there's a state law that says unless, okay, is
there a state law law? I, I, I don't know.
I'd have to. How about this? This is a workshop
we're not required to vote on anything. We've given some
MP ambiguous feed feedback to this city manage. Perhaps you
can explore it a little bit with.
City attorney and yeah, even if you don't bring it
back to us as an ordinance, you could bring it
back in the city manager's report on so far, I've
discovered this.
And then we somehow have something.
Because we need to be done.
All right. I think
this part of our workshop is closed somewhat unsatisfactorily, but
it is closed.
Can we move to review of workshop schedule. Thank you.
Yeah. So there's no, there's no new workshop requests.
Requests, you see the list of workshops that are coming
up. There's a few items on the list that are
not ready. There's a few items that are ready. There's
only a few more workshop slots.
Slots left in 2026 that don't have something on it.
So.
Unless there's a particular guidance wants to get on scheduling
of any of those. There's no action required of you
tonight.
Madam mayor. Yes. I'd like to ask that we have
pay as you throw on the agenda as a workshop
at some point in 2026. All right. I think you're
gonna need to do a workshop proposal.
Oh, even though it's already. No, it's it's on there.
Oh, wait, I'm sorry. Didn't see. That's that's one of
the ones that's ready to be scheduled. Number five. What
a bad, sorry, I just gave you, sorry. It's late.
All right, so it's ready to be scheduled. So.
Alright, let's you trust the city manager and I have
to figure out when we should schedule that. Thank you.
Anyone else?
Anything, anything
all right. My beloved.
Counselors.
Hello? I think we should. I, well, I just wanna
say again that with regard to the city facilities,
I believe we should put it.
On the agenda, every agenda.
And we as a placeholder and we don't have to
talk about it every time, but things are coming up.
And I'm very afraid that we, we.
Are there's so many things and so many issues that
we should.
Discuss if we want to try to keep.
Things moving with our public.
Facilities projects. Okay. Yeah. May, can, may I respond to
that? Is that okay? Yeah, I think.
My judgment is that most counselors would agree with the
substance of what you've said, that we need to keep
talking about this as would our residents who are expecting
us to come up with some.
Conclusions and plan.
I we know that we're talking about it next meeting.
It would not have worked to put it into this,
this meeting clearly. So I, I just need to know,
is it the will of the council?
That Scott and I kind of keep in mind.
Whenever it seems practical to put it in there. We
will, but the, the trouble is, for example, what got
carried over was three.
Resolutions three orders.
And I've been wondering to myself.
Does that mean we can only talk.
The context of those three, if those are on the
agenda, I mean, we may wanna have a more general
conversation about issues related to the public facility. Right. And
that's why it was made a workshop last time, last
week. Yeah. And I would've agree with doing that just
in general, if there's, if you and you have the
right to.
Say, we're not gonna do it tonight. There's nothing new
to discuss, but it all, then it gives us the
right to talk about it. So your vision is it's
a workshop we're only gonna go on agenda. Stay workshop
stays fine. Can we, we put an on the next
agenda. Can we do, I mean, don't people feel like
we need to talk. I support that.
I support that and, and it is next week. It's
on for next week. I know it is. Okay. And
then we'll go one week at a time. If next
week we still think we have more things to talk
about, then we can, it is on next week. Just
see, know the consultants are, are coming full to give
you up updated and information on.
Some things that you asked for. So it, it, it
will be on there in addition to the things that
counselor west noted. Okay. All right. So we're definitely next
week.
Unless we just wrap everything up next week. Probably.
In weeks to come, it would be helpful to get
regularly. I don't, we don't have to talk about it
tonight, but in the future, cuz is the expectation that
the design team is here and all the departments are
here every week, just in case.
Counsel wants to talk about something. What do you want
to talk about? Because if you're gonna talk about something,
you probably want them there, but if we don't know
what it is, you're gonna ask. It's kind of hard
to.
Have a conversation or, or give, or if you're, if
it's a workshop, you're gonna give us feedback on something
and without the design team or other staff here, it's
hard to kind of.
I don't think that is a good idea. I don't,
I don't think that I think we should be able
to have these conversations. Yes. I agree with that.
But tying up staff and the design team's time.
Will it just in case. I don't think that is,
is a, is a good idea. I think that we
could take.
Very specific questions. We have deliver them as a result
of the workshop. And then maybe at the next workshop
they report back. Got it. That would be how I
would like to. I think that's a good way do
that. I do too.
All right. Can we have a motion to adjourn this
workshop?
To move. So moved by counselor pride.
Seconded by counselor Walker. All in favor. Thank you very
much, everyone. Thank you.
Oh, we're adjourned. I guess I could say those words.
Thank .